+++
title=  "The Mount Of Luna"
description=  "His realm is the world of imagination. He keeps humanity from becoming too material, and enables us to see with the mind's eye"
image=  "/photos/objects/hand.jpg"
linkb=  "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-23-mars"
linkbtext=  "Chapter 23"
linkf=  "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-25-venus"
linkftext=  "Chapter 25"

+++


THE sixth Mount type is the Lunarian represented by the Mount of Luna or the Mount of the Moon. 

This mount is strengthened by the= 
- star
- triangle
- circle
- single vertical line
- square, or 
- trident

Defects are shown by= 
- grills
- crosses
- cross-bars
- islands
- dots, or
- badly formed stars either of health or character

Color, nails, and other matters detailed in the course of this chapter will determine which (119). The Mount of the Moon must be judged both by the strength of its curve outwardly on the percussion of the hand and by the size of the pad it forms on the inside of the palm. 

If it is seen forming a decided bulge outwardly, call it a well-developed Mount (120); if in addition it is exceedingly thick, forming a large pad on the inside of the hand, it must be regarded as a very strong Mount (121).

If the outward protuberance and the thick pad are both unusually large, you have an excessive Lunarian subject (122). In this type vertical lines on the Mount add strength to it and cross lines show defects. If you see a strong vertical line extending the length or nearly so of the Mount, it will indicate an added strength, and a number of vertical lines if lying close together will also increase its power. 

These lines on a Mount developed at the side, but flat in the palm, will be nearly as powerful as if the Mount showed a medium development inside the palm. If the outward development and the large pad in the palm is seen, which has also a deep, well-cut vertical line or lines, it will show an excessively developed Lunarian reaching to the danger-point of the type. The Mount must be divided into three sections, the upper, the middle, and the lower, corresponding to the three worlds of the fingers in their qualities, each section enabling one also to locate health difficulties peculiar to the type. 

Grilles, cross-bars, or crosses on the Mount, badly formed stars, islands, dots, chained or wavy lines will locate health defects, and when seen, the health indications of color, nails, I.ife line, and line of Mercury must be examined in connection with the Mount to aid in confirming the indications. The health defects of the Mount of the Moon are important, especially with women, as they bear directly on diseases peculiar to them, affecting life, temper, maternity, and future happiness. 

The upper, middle, and lower thirds of this Mount each show separate health difficulties, and when defects are seen on any particular third, you are at once warned that the health troubles peculiar to that third of the Mount are present. In this manner you can not only tell that your subject has a health defect, but as well what this defect is. Cross lines at the side of the hand have been erroneously called travel lines, and were supposed to show journeys. Vertical lines have been used to indicate voyages by water, cross lines journeys by land, and these interpretations given by the older palmists have come from the fact that the Lunarian has a penchant for water, is naturally nervous, restless, loves change or travelling, and when strong lines have been found on the Mount, his restlessness has been accentuated, making him want to travel, which he will do if such a thing is at all possible. 

Vertical lines, strengthening as they do his typical love of travel and also his typical love of water, make him the more likely to choose journeys by water rather than by land. This is the method of reasoning from which the use of vertical lines to indicate voyages arose. 

I mention these supposed travel lines at this point because, in our study of the Lunarian type, health defects must be constantly watched for, and if you should be led, by any previous knowledge, to consider cross lines or vertical lines as indicating journeys, you would not be in a position to diagnose the health defects of this type, especially among women, for you would be likely to read as a journey what really indicates illness. The entire percussion of the hand is often found covered with cross lines. This shows that the subject is delicate in more ways than one, even if no sign of it has appeared to make him conscious of any health delicacy. 

They are always hyper-nervous, which precedes actual disease. These cross lines are also seen on the hands of old persons, often those who did not have them when young. They have appeared as age has weakened the constitution. The health defects of Upper Mars, which are throat and bronchial difficulty, intestinal inflammations, and blood disorders, are all shown by these cross lines on that Mount, which lies on the percussion. Those of the Mount of the Moon, which will be enumerated later, are also shown by cross lines on the Mount, and thus a crossing of the whole side, or percussion of the hand, would show delicacy of the entire structure from throat to kidneys and bladder. 

If any portion of the percussion is more thoroughly cross-lined than the others, or lines run across from it to the Life line, with health defects of nails, color, etc., shown, you can tell which one of the delicate parts will first give way, by the portion of the Mounts at the side of the hand on which these markings occur most strongly, or from which a line runs to a delicate Life line. This will be more fully treated in the study of the lines.

DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF MOON No. 119. DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF MOON. NORMAL MOUNT OF MOON No. 120. NORMAL MOUNT OF MOON. STRONG MOUNT OF MOON No. 121. STRONG MOUNT OF MOON. EXCESSIVE MOUNT OF MOON No. 122. EXCESSIVE MOUNT OF MOON. The Mount Of The Moon. 



## Part 2 

While the Lunarian is not often seen in pure development, still he is to be found, and a part of his typical qualities will be present in nearly all of the subjects met. 

His realm is the world of imagination; he keeps humanity from becoming too material, and enables us to see with the " mind's eye." It is entirely because of the possession of imagination, a quality of mind which does not belong to the lower animals, and which gives to man the ability to form mental pictures, that certain words, sounds, or signs convey meanings - in short, that we have the power of speaking and communicating with each other. These methods of communication may be either by word of mouth in various languages; by telegraph, where each combination of dots on the sounder means a different letter, by combining which, words conveying ideas are produced; by writing, where each letter and every combination of them forms a word which conveys an idea to the mind; or by the sign language of the hand as employed by mutes, where each different manner of placing the fingers either means a letter, a word, or, with advanced users of this method, a whole statement. But none of these methods of communication would be possible if we lacked the imaginative power to link these lines, words, or gestures with the idea which they are intended to convey, and the understanding of these varied forms of communication would be impossible if we had not the ability to form a mental picture of the thing to which they refer. If I write the word house, it brings to mind a building and you mentally picture some sort of a structure. 

If I add, "A white frame house with low roof and red chimneys," you mentally see the house in your "mind's eye." This is the power of imagination, and if we did not have it we would be unable to communicate with each other, would have no ability to express ourselves. Thus the Lunarian was necessary, as he represents imagination, which makes possible communication, and he was made one of the seven types. Manifestly the more refined and greater the power of well-balanced imagination a subject possesses, the larger will be his vocabulary; the power of description will be greater and the ability to evolve new ideas increased. The more dense the subject, the more material are his imaginings, the more restricted his vocabulary, and, instead of catching an idea quickly, you have figuratively "to beat it into his head." 

This faculty of imagination and speech is what makes a high type of Lunarian brilliant; the lack of it makes the clodhopper, who can never say just what he wants to, who never mentally rises above the earth. Those subjects who can believe in nothing that they cannot touch, and who cannot carry in their minds mental pictures, lose much enjoyment and have little expansive ness of mind to help them through the world. When we find a subject with a well-developed Mount of the Moon, we have one who expresses himself well and can enjoy the pleasures of imagination; when we find it absent (123) we have one who can picture nothing to himself; when we find it excessive (see 122), we have a subject who easily becomes flighty, imaginative to a dangerous degree, and who even loses control of the mind entirely, becoming insane. 

Manifestly we care to find no excess nor deficiency with this Mount, but a good medium development, showing the presence of a healthy imagination, one that lifts the world above the plane of materialism into the realm of fancy. In the hands of the greatest linguists, musicians, composers, fiction or romance writers, we find this Mount strong. They are able to see their characters in the "mind's eye," clothe them with proper attributes, and make them living realities in the minds of their readers. It is the power of imagining how scenes described look, and how characters portrayed appear, that makes it a delight to read. If the power of imagination were gone from us, we could conceive nothing but the bare things we see. Beautiful scenery, birds, flowers, color, or form would have little meaning to us, and pure, dull, monotonous reality would be all we had. If there were no imagination there would be no hope for the future. Many have no such hope; they can picture no future toward which to press. These subjects are deficient in Lunarian qualities, and spend their lives arguing that nothing is true, and that life is a vain struggle. 

Granting that imagination may sometimes lead to false conclusions, it is better to have some of them than to be unable to see beyond a limited horizon. DEFICIENT MOUNT OF MOON No. 123. DEFICIENT MOUNT OF MOON. The Lunarian is tall in stature, fleshy in build, with the lower limbs thick and the feet large. He is often quite stout, but his flesh is not firm and his muscles are not strong. 

He is soft and flabby and instead of muscular vitality, his flesh has a spongy feeling. His complexion is dead white, giving him a decided pallor and marking him as the victim of a weak heart's action, anaemia, kidney trouble, and often of dropsy. His head is round, thick through the temples, bulging over the eyes, and with a low forehead. The hair is not thick, but straggly and fine in quality, blond or chestnut in color, and quite straight. His eyebrows are scanty, uneven in contour, and often grow together over the nose. The eyes are round and starey in appearance, often bulging, and frequently watery. The color is gray or light blue, the whites are clear, and the pupil has a luminous appearance, seeming to refract light and showing a prismatic gleam. 

The lids are thick and flabby, giving them a swollen look. The nose is short and small, quite often turning up at the end, and sometimes showing the nostrils very plainly. Frequently it is what we call a "pug" nose. The mouth is small and puckers, giving the appearance of being drawn together. The teeth are large and long, yellow in color, and irregularly placed in the gums, which are prominent and bloodless-looking. The teeth are soft and decay early. The chin is heavy, hanging in flabby folds and receding. The neck is fleshy, flabby, and wrinkled, connecting this peculiar-looking head with the fleshy-looking chest, which is again flabby and spongy in consistency. The voice is thin and pitched often in a high key. The ears are small and set close to his head. 

The abdomen is large and bulges forward, giving an awkward look, and the legs are not graceful, but thick and heavy, having a dropsical appearance. The feet are flat and large and the gait is a shuffle or is shambling, very much like the gait of a sailor when he walks on land. The hand of a Lunarian is often found puffy in appearance, flabby in consistency, white in color, fingers short and smooth, with tips conic or pointed; the thumb small in size, with the first phalanx pointed or deficient in length. The Lunarian is controlled by imagination, consequently he is dreamy, fanciful, and idealistic. He is one who builds air castles, plans great enterprises, which are never put into operation because they generally have no practical value. The Mount Of The Moon. Part 3 From the flabby, spongy character of his hand and muscular development, he is lazy in the extreme, preferring to live in cloudland rather than to dwell in an abode upon earth. 

He is constantly a prey to his imaginings, thinks he is ill, and has divers ailments, is fickle, restless, and changeable. It is hard for him to settle down to humdrum life, for he is always yearning for things beyond his reach. Therefore he is never satisfied long in one place, but desires a constant change of location and scene. This restless disposition leads him to spend his last dollar for travel, and often the Lunarian becomes a great traveller. The more lines there are on the Mount the more restless he becomes and the greater is his desire to go from place to place. So while the lines on the Mount of the Moon do not per se especially indicate journeys, they do strengthen the Lunar qualities of the subject, and this Lunar restlessness makes him a traveller if he has money to gratify this desire. If the hand is firm and the wealth equal to it, you may be sure that a subject with these lines will gratify his love of travel by taking long voyages. If the circumstances do not permit the subject to gratify his love for change you will find that these lines produce in him a yearning for travel. 

The Lunarian, by his physical construction, has white color and white coldness of temperament. To him "self" is a great word. He is lazy physically and lazy mentally. He loves to dream dreams, and work, which means either mental or physical exertion, is extremely distasteful to him. He is dreamy in look, his eyes have an uncanny expression, and their light blue or gray color speaks of coldness and dreaminess. Thus he becomes mystical, often melancholy, and grows superstitious. He believes in signs and omens, and has wonderful visions and hallucinations which grow to be real to him and influence him greatly. He is slow in his movements, phlegmatic in disposition, and extremely sensitive. He imagines slights when none are intended, and shrinks into himself and away from company. He does not love nor seek society. He realizes that he is different from other people, so retires to the woods or secluded places where he can enjoy himself by himself. He loves nature, birds, flowers, and all things which elevate the senses and excite the imagination, and to such surroundings he goes when out of touch with the world and its inhabitants. 

He is fond of poetry, but it is the epic kind or verses which bring to mind a chain of new material to dream about. He loves music, but of the deep classic kind, not the gay, sparkling melody that attracts the Venusian. He is a composer, and in seclusion and retirement produces profound classics. The Lunarian is very fond of water. He loves the murmur of the waves and the roar and thunder of the tempest. As far as he is able he lives near water, and is on it as much as possible. The Lunarian makes a good sailor. He is never generous; to him selfishness is innate. He is a big eater, though not sensual nor amorous. 

In his case the sexual appetites are excited by imagination, and not by physical heat. The Lunarian is lacking in self-confidence, and feels his unfitness for the active pursuits of life. He also lacks energy and perseverance, consequently is unsuccessful in the business world. If he is of a common type he has a hard time to get along. If of a high type he becomes a good writer of romance or fiction, and even of history. This type will be much assisted if he has a long finger of Mercury with the first phalanx long. 

With this latter combination, conic tips will add to the imaginative tendencies of his writings; they will become more practical if the tips are square, and active and original if spatulate. Thus we see in the Lunarian a peculiar subject, in whom imagination and fancy are always the dominating motives. It is a blessing that the pure type is not more common, but it is necessary to have some of the imagination common to it. If all the people in the world were pure Lunarians it would not be long before there would not be insane asylums enough to hold them. But the possession of a healthy imagination is the farthest possible step from insanity, and the development of the Mount must be very bad and very strong before you begin to think of attributing such an outcome to your subject. Imagination must mean a good quality until it is spoiled by being found in excess.

The Lunarian, while not as strongly impelled toward matrimony as some of the other types, still does not avoid it entirely. He is cold by nature and incapable of strong affection. He has not great physical strength, so the fires of passion do not inflame him. He is as fickle and capricious here as everywhere else, and makes strange alliances. Sometimes he marries one much older than himself, sometimes one a great deal younger - you cannot tell much about what he will do except that he will make a peculiar match. 

These subjects have not the faculty of being constant, and as they are naturally fickle, restless, and selfish they make poor husbands or wives; this is pronounced with conic or pointed tips, less a fact with square or spatulate. No type appears in greater abundance among those having marital unhappiness than the Lunarian. The health difficulties of the type are many, for he has poor circulation, thin blood, white color, and spongy muscles, and therefore readily falls a prey to disease. Note in the description of the type that he has a paunchy abdomen, which in all pure specimens is largely distended. This shows that the same flabby condition is present in the intestines as with the muscles, and this condition, which may properly be called a weakening of these tissues, makes them a fertile place for bacilli to propagate, and we find the Lunarian a victim of peritonitis, inflammation of the bowels, appendicitis, and all other inflammations that are liable to attack the intestinal tract. 

In epidemics of Asiatic cholera, Lunarians are the first victims, as the bacilli which produce cholera propagate readily under such conditions as they present. The Mount Of The Moon. Part 4 This liability to intestinal disorder is shown on the upper third of the Mount by cross-bars, grilles, badly formed stars, dots, islands, crosses, or similar defective markings. When such are seen on this part of the Mount, bowel delicacy exists, and the Life line should be at once examined to determine how serious it is. If the Life line is broken, crossed, islanded, has a star on it, forks, or any of the innumerable defects peculiar to it, feel safe in saying that the subject has bowel difficulties of a serious nature. The Lunarian is also predisposed to gout and rheumatism. These are shown by the defects, such as crosses, grilles, etc., mentioned above, appearing on the middle third of the Mount. Other indications often confirm this; for instance, you will sometimes see a line running from the Mount of Saturn to the line of Life, either cutting it or stopping on it. 

This line has in addition frequently an island (124). I follow the practice with this indication of always looking for health defects of Saturn, one of which is rheumatism. I have many times seen a line running from the middle portion of the Mount of the Moon, another seat of rheumatism, and joining the line from Saturn either where it cuts the line of Life or somewhere in its course (124). This has shown invariably that the subject is either at the time a victim to severe rheumatism, has had it, or will have it, for when this double marking is seen, the rheumatic tendency is hereditary. The lower third of the Mount with defective markings found will indicate kidney and bladder trouble in men, and on a woman's hand, in addition, very pronounced female weakness (see Chittenden Hotel suicide). If you find the defective markings on this portion of the Mount, and the hand and nails very white, swollen and flabby in consistency, it will indicate kidney and bladder difficulty as well as tendency to dropsy. This dropsy will attack the feet and legs of this type, which are already swollen in appearance. I have noted also that kidney trouble is most often shown by cross-bars on the Mount. Often a line from such a bad marking on the Mount will be found running to the Life line, which will be forked or defective in some way, and this will show that these diseases threaten the life of the subject. Female trouble is also shown by this lower third of the Mount when defectively marked. When female weakness is present, there is often a star on the line of Mercury, usually near the line of Head or at a point where the Mercury line crosses the line of Head (125). 

When this star is seen, it is an unmistakable indication of serious female weakness. This I have verified hundreds of times. Remembering that these organs make possible the reproduction of the species, and that their diseased condition makes maternity either impossible or hazardous, the importance of this indication is very great, for it may tell why women seemingly healthy never have had children. It is also valuable as a pre-marriage indication, tending to show whether a union is likely to be fruitful. This is the place on the hand you must examine if consulted as to why no children have blessed a woman a question that is often eagerly asked. You can thus readily detect proof of diseased conditions of the reproductive organs, and the subject cannot have children while they are in such a state. Subjects so afflicted are frequently unaware of trouble of this character, consequently do not consult a physician and get the relief which is possible to them. This is one instance where a good practice of Palmistic knowledge can transform a barren, joyless home into one of fruition and happiness. These health indications shown by the three sections of the Mount of the Moon are so often encountered and so reliable that I commend them to most careful attention. 

It does not follow that when these markings and health defects are seen the subject is a Lunarian, but it does show that he has a health defect peculiar to this type. Which one it is will be indicated by whatever portion of the Mount shows the defective markings =  bowel trouble, upper third; gout and rheumatism, middle third; kidney, bladder, and female trouble, lower third. RHEUMATIC MARKING FROM SATURN No. 124. RHEUMATIC MARKING FROM SATURN. FEMALE DISEASE ON MERCURY LINE No. 125. FEMALE DISEASE ON MERCURY LINE. The Lunarian is found, as are all the other types, with his bad side developed. In this case he is shorter in stature, the hair stiff and brittle, the skin dead white and spotted, the eyes watery and gray, and the pores of the skin exuding disagreeable perspiration. This subject is talkative, is apt to be untruthful, often allowing the imagination to run rampant, and thus he deceives not only others but himself as well. These subjects are mean and selfish, cowardly, and, while they have no physical passion, they constantly seek amorous pleasures in order to gratify their imagination. In this low class of Lunarians are found nymphomaniacs. They are deceitful,-hypocritical, and slander everyone who incurs their displeasure. They are insolent, unchaste, and most disagreeable creatures, and are shunned and abhorred by mankind. There is an important matter always to consider in connection with the Mount of the Moon, viz.=  its excessive development and consequent liability to produce insanity. 

If it is very large, both bulging at the percussion and thick in the palm, having strong vertical lines, or with a well-marked star, it is a Mount liable to lead to the excess of imagination, and, consequently, insanity. This may be a mild species of hallucination if the hand is fine and the indications not pronounced, or it may be dangerous and brutal mania with a coarse brutal type of Lunarian. Excess of the Mount will make excess of the imagination, which, per se, means an unbalanced condition of mind; so with every excessive Mount look for this unhinging of the mental faculties commonly called insanity, whose presence is indicated in several ways, the excessive Mount of the Moon being one of them. In seeking the cause which has produced insanity in any subject, that arising from the excess of the Mount of the Moon shows it has not been shock or disease, but that it is excessive imagination inherent in the subject. This form of mania is difficult to treat, for the nature of the subject, which is inherently crazy, cannot be changed. There is another matter bearing on the subject which this Mount shows. With women suffering from female trouble there is always more or less disturbance of the mind. They grow gloomy and despondent when their trouble is intense, and especially at the time of the monthly periods. The Mount Of The Moon. Part 5 During some such periods the mind of an otherwise strong and healthy subject becomes temporarily clouded, and she imagines all sorts of things, frequently that her husband is growing less affectionate, and kindred ideas. During all such periods these subjects should have the greatest care and kindness, and nothing should ever be allowed which will annoy them. I have seen the hands of a number of suicides with this lower third of the Mount of the Moon showing female weakness, and who were undoubtedly temporarily unbalanced when they committed the act (see Chittenden Hotel suicide). In the insane asylums are many cases from this cause, all showing this marking on the hand. It is natural that the Lunarian type will be much influenced by various qualities indicated by the several parts of the hand. Texture of the skin will bring to bear refiniug or coarsening influences. 

If the texture is soft and fine, it will undoubtedly be found with flabby consistency, consequently while the imaginings will be on a high plane of refinement these subjects will be lazy and accomplish little. Their ideals will be high, tastes refined, the dreams that come to them will be of beautiful and refined things. Coarseness will be abhorrent and aestheti-cism extreme. Oscar Wilde is an example of this class. The medium texture is best with a well-developed Lunar Mount, for it will speak of more energy and more practical ideas. This is the subject who will not be bound down by materialism, but who has a reasonable play of the mind. Coarse texture will mean an accompaniment of the hard consistency. This subject will have an inelastic mind, coarse and unrefined ideas, low ideals, with superstition extremely marked, or intense mysticism, and often the bad development of the type is accompanied by this coarse texture of skin. The less the intelligence and the coarser the nature, the more superstitious is a subject. Consistency will tell how much the natural Lunar laziness is increased or how much energy from some of the other types has been infused. Flabby consistency is expected in a pure type, and accentuates all the qualities of the type - idealism, fancy, dreaminess, and laziness. Such subjects are idle dreamers, and the world seldom knows that they have lived. Elastic consistency shows that intelligent energy will put to some use the ideas of the mind, and the subject will be clever, not bound down by rule, versatile, ingenious, a good talker, and will have original ideas, for healthy imagination produces these things. In addition, he will not sit idly and make nothing of his ideas, but will work, for he has energy. If a business man, the subject will devise new schemes to push his business. If a writer, he will be happy in bis efforts, for he will have both the mind to produce and energy to do the work. Some of the best authors belong to this class. As a musician and composer he will have the natural ability for his work and the energy to do it. Hard consistency is abnormal. It will give great activity and will make the subject restless, superstitious, selfish, and mystical. 


These people are not contented with their lot in life, but are growlers and trouble breeders. Their imagination is active but not directed toward elevated matters, and, being constantly dissatisfied themselves, they create dissatisfaction among others. The hard-handed Lunarian has distorted views on religion and all matters of life. He is often uneducated, though he assumes to talk like a professor, but reaches after an idea which he never succeeds in expressing. He is superstitious, and often seeks all of the lower manifestations of Spiritism which appeal to his love of the supernatural. These subjects are the greatest travellers, always discontented, out of tune with the world, and seeking change or excitement. Flexibility shows the elastic mind, and consequently adds to the Lunarian imagination. If marked, the subject will be flighty, will be extreme in views and moods, one moment exalted, the next depressed. These people are brilliant, for with the flexible mind added to imagination they could not be otherwise, but they hate effort and do not make much of their talent. They are good conversationalists, and versatile mentally. Normal flexibility will reduce the danger of extremes. The mind will not so readily become a prey to imagination, but will be held in check and directed into practical channels. There will be no lessening of the ability to form mental pictures, but there will be less tendency to be dominated by them. Thus medium flexibility is best for a Lunarian to possess. The stiff hand will indicate lack of intelligence in the subject. He will have the lower qualities of the type, will be miserly, will lack sympathy, and his imagination will satisfy itself in hunting mysterious manifestations rather than in developing any product of a highly original mind. He will shudder when the door creaks, will be terrified when a dog howls, and being cold, selfish, and fanciful, is a hard subject with whom to deal. The color of the hands claims attention with this type. White is the color typical of the strong Lunarian. It will aid greatly in judging the degree of type. 


If very pronounced, the coldness of the type will be strongly marked, and health defects must be carefully studied. If the hand is pink, it will show that the type is warmed up, and the heart is stronger, the blood richer and is reaching the skin in good supply. With this condition there will be less mysticism, less idealism, more practical ideas, more warmth of nature, less selfishness, and less restlessness. The subject will be even tempered, less fickle, and less liable to health defects of the type. Red color will show a great increase of these improvements. Ardor and warmth will be marked, and often, when you cannot understand why a Lunar subject shows so little coldness, it will be found that the hand, lines, and nails are quite red. This warms him up in every way, and makes health troubles of the lower third less likely, but renders him more liable to the bowel inflammations of the upper third. It also makes him amorous and easily excited by anything that is suggestive or appeals to his imagination. Yellow color will add a disagreeable indication, for it will make him cross and ugly. The Mount Of The Moon. Part 6 These qualities added to coldness and selfishness, which are always present with yellow color, form a combination that leads the subject easily to become bad and vicious. He has distorted (yellow) views of life, people, and things, and, with a brain affected by poisoned blood, and being already highly imaginative, he sees everything from a bad standpoint, and easily becomes insane. With yellow color we find gouty and rheumatic troubles pre-liable, as shown on the middle third of the Mount. These must be looked after, for they will greatly influence the life of a subject. Blue color is often found, for with poor blood sluggishly pumped we find indications of a weak heart and consequent blue color. This is often an accompaniment of the diseases of the lower third of the Mount, and especially with women. When found, the age must be carefully noted, in order to tell whether the disturbance is permanent, or incidental to puberty, or change of life. The nails must be considered, for if we find a broad nail indicating strong general health, it will show that the subject is less liable to health defects and has a better temperament. This broad nail, if of good texture and pink, will add to the subject's chances, for with good general health, lack of nervous excitement, and normal circulation, the temper, mind, and disposition will all improve. If the nail is narrow, it will show delicate constitution, and the Mount must be carefully examined for health indications. Color must be carefully noted under the nails, for here we see a reflection of the white, pink, red, yellow, or blue disturbances of health and temperament. The texture of the nail must be considered. A badly crossed Mount with fluted or brittle nails shows a highly sensitive, discontented, irritable, nervous person. Such an one will be a victim to many hallucinations. Heart-disease nails will be a bad indication, for they will add organic disturbance to a subject already predisposed to heart trouble, which is almost always complicated with kidney trouble. Short, critical nails will make a pronounced subject pugnacious and more irritable, constantly criticising and fault-finding. Black hair on the hands will strengthen the subject and tend to show that there is sufficient iron in the blood and system to largely counteract the flabby condition of the tissues. It will add fire, vigor, and force to the character. This subject is liable to be capricious, not always trustworthy, and generally given to stretching the truth, as Oriental instability is added to vivid imagination. Blond hair will make these subjects more phlegmatic, less volatile, and less strong. It will make them slower, but more trustworthy and less likely to indulge in falsehood. They are not so easily carried off their feet by excessive imagination, and are consequently more practical, having a tinge of Teutonic-Saxon quality to restrain them. The hand as a whole, when taken in connection with the Mount, will indicate which of the three worlds will rule. With excess in the fingers the mental will dominate, and the imaginative faculties will be devoted to language, for which these subjects have great aptness, easily becoming expert linguists, or it will expend itself in scientific or literary studies. This subject would make a good college professor. If the middle portion of the hand is well developed, business qualities will be present. This subject will, if a writer, professor, or business man, bring good business ideas to his assistance. With this combination he may become celebrated and rich at the same time. If the lower portion of the hand is largest we have the dominion of the baser world. The imaginings will be low, not elevating. If the appetites are base, this low imagination will make suggestive what to other minds would convey no such meaning. The Mount itself must be subdivided into three sections and the same general rules applied as to the fingers and their individual phalanges. If the upper part of the Mount is developed most fully, all of the imaginings will be of a high order, and the same rules will apply as with the hand as a whole. 

From this formation we get linguists, professors of language, literature, and music of a classic kind, and authors. With the upper and middle third both developed, these subjects will make money through their efforts, for the mental and business worlds are joined. When the upper two worlds are deficient and the lower is like a knob on the base of the hand it shows the domination of the lower side of the type, and the thoughts and imaginings are all low. With this development of the lower third of the Mount, together with a deficient Mount of Venus which is grilled, a double or triple Girdle of Venus, a chained white Heart line, and an oozy palm, you have those who practise secret vices (126), bringing on nervous disorders, the mildest form of which is hysteria. DEVELOPMENT OF LOWER THIRD OF MOUNT No. 126. DEVELOPMENT OF LOWER THIRD OF MOUNT. The finger-tips must be applied to whichever world of the Mount is in the lead. Pointed tips make the subject a prey to great idealism, religious exaltation, and he is utterly unpractical. Superstition, mysticism, and etherialism will make the life of this subject miserable and useless. He yearns continually for the impossible and unrealizable. Conic tips are normal to the type, and add their intuitive qualities, tinging the subject with romance and fancy. These subjects hate to work and belong to the lazy class. Square tips make the subject more practical. They pull down the idealism to a common-sense plane, make the subject more regular in habit and thought, and we get the best results of the type. Historians, composers, musicians who regard all the rules of metre and rhythm, are found with such combinations. Here we find a healthy imagination, which, coupled with practical ideas and common-sense, produces successful Lunarians. Spatulate tips add activity to an already restless person, especially if the Mount is grilled and cross-lined. They are original in ideas, entirely unconventional, and their danger is that they may constantly chase some will-o'-the-wisp of the fancy, until they become rovers indeed. The Mount Of The Moon. 

Part 7 If they have a smooth Mount, good Head line, and some square formation of the sides of the fingers, they become brilliant essayists, deep students or musicians, in which lines they excel as executionists. Knotty fingers reduce the fanciful condition to a marked degree, as they make a subject reason. They are in fact one of the greatest reducing factors for a Lunarian, and these subjects produce practical writers, teachers, and deep thinkers. They can throw over the most abstruse question a shimmer of imagination which makes it interesting, and wherever they are, or whatever the subject of their efforts, good reasons are given for everything they say, while at the same time they are not tied down to the earth by severe materialism. Smooth fingers, with their impulse and intuition, their artistic sense and distaste for analysis, form an accompaniment which brings out the Lunarian qualities strongly. In this case imagination is heightened, usefulness becomes subservient to beauty, and the result is a highly artistic nature full of poetic ideals. These subjects love romance, poetry, and fiction, and, if writers, they produce such works. They love art, painting, and sculpture that is the product of some artist's imagination. 

They are quick in forming opinions, not always practical, and add the artistic intuitive qualities of smooth fingers to the imaginative ideals of the Lunarian. Such subjects are likely to be continually changing in their ideas and occupations, winding up their lives without having put their naturally brilliant qualifications to good account. Long fingers add minutiae and detail to the Lunarian qualities. Such subjects when describing some creation of their fancy will not omit an iota that can make the picture complete. These long fingers with this naturally slow type add to the slowness; and to the selfishness belonging to the type, the distrust and suspicion of long fingers. The subject is apt to be orderly in dress and surroundings, and extremely likely to be sensitive and ready to take offense at trifles. If writers, they are prone to sacrifice strength to detail, and as teachers will prolong their dissertations to unwise lengths. As painters, they can create an imaginative scene, and not omit a detail in their treatment of the subject. In conversation they are fanciful and tiresome. Short fingers make the subject quick, impulsive, and likely to "fly off the handle." They also make him slovenly in appearance, careless about everything he does, and apt to rely entirely on inspiration. These subjects plan the greatest schemes, which are usually entirely unpractical. They are continually in danger of making mistakes from going too fast and attempting too much, and they are the persons who always have a new idea which is "sure to be successful," and this leads them into continually fooling themselves. The thumb will either calm the subject or make him more visionary. 

A large thumb will show strong will and reason, which materially strengthen the subject. A short thumb reduces both will and reason and makes him visionary, vacillating, and weak. This is especially true if the thumb be pointed. Remember that a square, spatulate, or paddle-shaped short thumb is more stable and strengthening than a pointed or conic short thumb, and that pointed or conic tips will reduce the strength of a large thumb. Examine the individual phalanges of the thumb to see if will is in excess of reason, or vice versa, then apply your information to the Lunar qualities. See if a thick, coarse thumb is to brutalize the imagination, or whether a delicate, refined thumb will make the ideals high. Then note the Head line. If it goes straight across the hand it makes the ideas more practical; if it droops to the Mount of the Moon it tinges them with imagination. If it is clear, well marked, and of good color, you have a strong mind, self-control, and healthy imagination. This gives all the benefits of the type without its dangers. If the Head line is broken, wavy, islanded, chained, poorly marked, or badly colored, containing perhaps in its course a star, you must ascribe poor faculty of mental concentration, lack of firmness, a weakened brain, and vivid imagination; and from such subjects come those who are continually changing their mind, are restless, never satisfied, and vacillating, and, if actual insanity is escaped, are continually verging on an unbalanced condition of mind. Thus the Lunarian ranges from a highly gifted subject to one who is insane, all indicated by the size, character, and markings of the Mount. Wherever no Mount is found, you find dense materialism; when you find too much Mount, there is too much imagination, which may mean insanity. So, again, we seek to find the happy medium which will show the healthy operation of the mind. Do not expect to find many typical Lunarians, but do expect to find with nearly every subject, imagination in some degree developed. You need have no trouble whatever in grading its extent, the plane on which it operates, nor the combinations that accompany it if you have thoughtfully digested this chapter and what precedes it.