+++
title=  "The Mount Of Saturn"
heading=  "Chapter 20"
image=  "/photos/objects/hand.jpg"
description=  ""
linkb=  "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-19-jupiter"
linkbtext=  "Chapter 19"
linkf=  "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-21-apollo"
linkftext=  "Chapter 21"
+++

The Saturnian is the second type to be considered, and the parts of the hand by which he is identified are the Mount and finger of Saturn.

The higher the Mount of Saturn is developed, the larger and longer the finger, and the squarer the tip of this finger, the more pronounced is the type of the subject.

A highly developed Mount of Saturn is a rarity, and in the greatest number of hands there is instead a depression.
A long finger of Saturn is quite common, however, showing the presence of some Saturnian qualities, and the Mount, though it may not be prominent, often shows, by the lines upon it, that it is of more than ordinary development. Great care must be used with this Mount, as it shows strong characteristics.
As single signs or in combination, the triangle, circle, trident, single vertical line, or square increase the strength of the Mount of Saturn.

The cross-bar, grille, cross, or island indicate defects of the Mount, either of health or character; nails, color, etc. will determine which The largest number of Saturnians will be known from the fact that the apex of the Mount of Saturn is central, and the apices of the other Mounts all lean toward it. 

A more pronounced identification of the type, and also a very common one, is to find the finger of Saturn standing upright, with the other fingers drawn toward it.
I have chosen such an illustration to accompany this chapter because it is quite typical and much more common than the high Mount. Illustration No. 39 is also a Saturnian subject, identified by apices leaning toward Saturn, Head line deflected toward Saturn, this finger being also highest set.

The Saturuian is a peculiar person, and, while we need a goodly degree of his sober qualities, it is a blessing that the world is not peopled entirely with this type, or it would be, in reality, " a vale of tears." I consider the finger of Saturn as the balance-wheel to the character, and, as an indicator, of great accuracy concerning the power possessed by the subject to hold undue enthusiasm in check. The Saturuian type keeps the Jnpiterian. the Apollonian, the Martian, and the Venusiau from going too fast and from being carried away by their excessive spirit. These brighter types, while adding gayety to the world, need the Saturnian to restrain and hold them back. 

The Saturnian is a prudent, wise, sober necessity, greatly needed among the seven types, but not the one to be chosen if in any excessive degree of development. The Saturnian is the (See also No. 39.) represser, who lays his hand on the shoulder of enthusiasm and bids it take a view of the dark side before leaping. 

Other types are so endowed with health and ardor that there seems to be no cautious side to their natures, and they become reckless and careless of results and the cost. The Saturnian's point of view is the gloomy one, consequently it is he who brings that forward, and causes the spontaneous types to pause and think. He is the man who can show you "how the other half lives," and thus makes you appreciate your own blessings. Socially, he lacks the ability to enter into the spirit of the occasion, and, therefore, he is often called a "wet blanket" I consider him the balance-wheel, a necessary evil, if you choose, but a type the world could not do without. The Saturnian type, to bring out its better side, should be only slightly developed. It is a bad type, as will appear later, if found in excessive degree, and not the happiest type for the possesser, even when present only in normal quantity. DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF SATURN No. 98. DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF SATURN. 

A SATURNIAN HAND No. 99. A SATURNIAN HAND. The typical Saturnian is the tallest of the seven types and his finger is the longest on the hand. He is gaunt, thin, and pale, his skin is yellow, rough, dry, and wrinkled, hanging in flabby folds, or else drawn tightly over the bones. He is the purely bilious type, and yellow is his distinctive color. His hair is thick and dark, often black, straight and harsh. He loses it when quite young, adding baldness to his otherwise unprepossessing appearance. His face is long, commonly called " hatchet-shaped " from its thinness, his cheek bones are high and prominent, with the saffron-hued skin drawn tightly over them. The cheeks are sunken, with skin flabby and wrinkled. The eyebrows are thick and stiff", growing together over the nose and turning up at the outer ends. The eyes are deep set and extremely black, with a sad, subdued expression which changes only when flashes of anger, suspicion, or eagerness stir his mind. Being bilious, the whites of his eyes show yellow color. His ears are large, and stand out from his head, often seeming to be actually heavy. 

His nose is long, straight, and thin, coming to a sharp point at the end. The nostrils do not dilate as he breathes, but are rigid and stiff. His mouth is large, the lips thin and pale, the lower jaw and lower lip quite prominent and firm. He has good teeth in his youth, but they are soft in texture and decay early. Neither are the gums healthy, having a pale, sickly, bloodless look. If the Saturnian has a beard it is dark, stiff, and straight, growing thickly on the chin and lip, but very sparse on the cheeks. The chin is prominent and large, the neck lean and long, with muscles showing prominently like cords, and the blue veins standing out under the shrunken and flabby skin. His Adam's apple is plainly in evidence. His chest is thin, the lungs seem cramped, as if operating in narrow, contracted quarters, and his voice as it comes through the thin lips is harsh and unpleasant. The shoulders are high and have a decided stoop, and the arms are long and hang in a lifeless manner at his sides. 

His step has no spring, and his gait is a shambling one, seeming to proclaim a person who is miserable, bilious, and gloomy. The whole appearance of the Saturnian impresses you with its lack of nourishment, lack of healthy blood supply, and its lean gawkiness; the dark, sad eyes, stiff, black hair, narrow chest, stooping shoulders, and shuffling gait all combine to bear this out. The Mount Of Saturn. Part 2 He is a man to whom a bright side in life does not often appear, one whose life is lightened by no joy of exuberant spirits, filled with no animal vitality, no heat, warmth, and magnetism, but rather with yellow biliousness, mingled with white coldness. The insufficient blood current, poisoned with bile, is weakly flowing through his body, pumped by a flabby heart, and reaches the outer skin with a diminished force, casting over his spirits the depressing effect of a bilious influence. This is the typical Saturnian. It is small wonder that, when the dashing Apollonians or Venusians, handsome, attractive, and magnetic, filled with the joy of living, meet him and try to fill him with their enthusiasm, the Saturnian cannot feel their joy, or share their enthusiasm, but shakes his head mournfully, and thinks of how much sorrow there is in this world. As the Saturnian is the represser, you will appreciate the wisdom of constructing him ugly, gloomy, and sad, in order that he might accomplish the purpose of his creation. If he were only wise and formed in the Apollonian mould of physical beauty, the love of gayety would run away with his wisdom. Mere wisdom, if he were beautiful, bright, strong, and healthy, could not hold in check the Apollonian enthusiasm. 

But the Saturnian is physically built so that he cannot be carried away with enthusiastic, joyous, or frivolous amusements. No matter how much he may want to be, he cannot, with his ugliness, have Venusian power of attraction; he cannot be other than the Saturnian that he is. In addition to all this, he is cynical, lacks veneration, and is a born doubter. Instead of seeking the society of others he avoids it, and his tendency is to withdraw himself from the social world. He prefers the country to the city, is often a student, and chooses agricultural pursuits, chemistry, and other laboratory occupations, which do not require him to come in contact with people. He is not a "mixer," has not the faculty of attracting and holding friends, so does not succeed well in business where he has to depend upon genial ways or attractive manners. His love of solitude makes farm life peculiarly attractive to him, and his penchant for earthy things makes him by nature a horticulturist, market gardener, florist, or a botanist. By reason of his love for digging and exploring in the earth, he has often found wells of oil, or mines of coal and minerals. This has led people to consider him lucky, and for this reason Saturn has become the Mount and type of Fate. The Saturnian has a love for all occult studies, and is proficient in them. He has a mystical streak that makes him extremely superstitious. He loves chemistry, for the compounding of drugs and elements has an air of mystery about it, and physics is also a congenial study. Higher mathematics and medicine are strong favorites, and in both these fields he is very successful. The Saturnian is no shallow fellow, but is deep and a true scientist. While others are spending their time in gayety he is engrossed in study, has secluded himself from society, and, surrounded by his books, retorts, and figures, is working out difficult problems. He is eminently cautious and prudent. He is suspicious of both the fidelity and honesty of his fellows, and does not readily go into business enterprises with them. Real estate, farms, and buildings seem to him less risky than stocks, bonds, or mercantile enterprises, consequently these are the investments he chooses. He is, of course, a conservative person, and does not do anything hastily, for prudence and caution are his watchwords. The Saturnian can be led, not driven. He instinctively dislikes to obey, but feels flattered at an attempt to induce him to do anything. He rebels if rubbed the wrong way, talks a great deal, what he says has weight because he has the reputation of being profound, so he often makes all kinds of trouble. His caution, however, enables him to get away and not get hurt in the upheavals he causes. 

In all his surroundings he likes soberness, and gray, black, or brown will be apt to predominate in his apparel, nor will his home have any startling colors in it. His physical heat being under normal, he is not amorous. He shuns society rather than courts it, he repels the opposite sex rather than attracts. Thus the fervor of warm passions does not glow within him, and he does not care to marry. In fact, a pure Saturnian would not marry; the idea would be absolutely repugnant to him. In handling the marriage question, for a subject strongly Saturnian, you will know that marriage is not likely, so absolutely plain indications must be found before you commit yourself on the subject. His prudence gives him another quality, - he is saving and even stingy and miserly. The stronger the Saturnian indications, the stronger these avaricious tendencies. He is slow, - one so cautious could not be otherwise, - but is a patient, indefatigable worker. The Saturnian loves music and is often a fine performer and a composer, but his music has a tinge of sadness and melancholy and is severely classical. He is not a great lover of art, though he admires beauty. His favorite pictures will be landscapes and natural scenery, flowers, and the product of field and forest. He writes well, produces histories, fine treatises on scientific and occult subjects, books on chemistry, or short articles on agriculture. He sometimes writes excellent ghost stories or tales, in which morose heroes go into monasteries. For amusement the Saturnian seeks his books and the studies which take him away from the haunts of men. He is opinionated, does not like to be contradicted, is independent, and dislikes restraint. Under the surface the Saturnian dislikes mankind. He is not beautiful or attractive, is less loved than others, and feels his ugliness, knows his ungainliness, and withdraws himself from his fellows, having in his heart jealousy and hatred of them. This feeling is present even with a Saturnian who cannot be classed as belonging to the bad type. Dislike of mankind is a Saturnian quality developed in some degree even when the type is not pronounced. We may say truly this is a dangerous type at its best, and at its worst produces a poisoner and a malevolent wretch. When we see stooping shoulders, a hunched back, and the sapped vitality has produced a cripple, with perhaps crossed eyes added, scant, coarse hair, and leathery skin, you have a creature capable of the deeds of Mr. Hyde. This is the low, mean, jealous, surly, dishonest villain; a lower state of degradation than any other type can reach, except the Mer-curian, but vile enough for all. These malformed Saturnians will stick a dagger into your back, and gloat over your death agonies. No more malevolent creatures live. This, of course, is a picture so exaggerated as to be scarcely conceivable, but it is sometimes found. 

The Mount Of Saturn. Part 3 We have now followed the Saturnian from the sober "balance-wheel," through a series of developments and characteristics to the wretch just described. You can appreciate the gravity of this type, and the handling of the Mount must be done with great care. With a pronounced Saturnian development, use all your powers to learn how much of it is in the subject uncounteracted by other qualities. Some Saturnian should be present, for the absence of any makes an unbalanced character, but the subject wants only just enough to give the balance needed. Any excess will make a morbid, melancholy, gloomy person, pessimistic and stingy. The very strong Mount and finger, or, which occurs more often, all the fingers and apices leaning toward the finger of Saturn, will show the good type I have described, who is peculiar but not necessarily evil. The excessively grilled or crossed development of the Mount, bad Heart-line and with crooked, gnarled fingers and hard hand, will show the bad type. Everything you know should be brought to bear on the case when a Saturnian is before you, in order to determine how strongly the qualities of the type are developed. 

In health matters there are certain diseases to which Saturnians are predisposed, and in a strongly Saturnian subject, with bad health showing on the Life line, it is nine chances to one that the trouble will be one of the diseases peculiar to the type; which one can be told by the nails, color, or some other health indication. First of all the Saturnian is the purely bilious type. His is not a temporary trouble of the liver, but a structural disease of the organ, hence the presence of bile poison in the blood. This makes the Saturnian yellow, which color will be found tinging his nails, palm, lines, and Mount. All the troubles which yellow color indicates, both as to health and temperament, are to be attributed to the subject if that color is present. As bile in the blood creates intense nervousness, the Saturnian is troubled with this as one of his health difficulties. If this nervousness goes far it causes danger of paralysis. The degree of nerve trouble is easy to determine from the nails, which should be carefully noted. Rheumatism is another trouble, also hemorrhoids and varicose veins; the tendency toward the two latter can be determined by noting how prominently the veins on the hands stand out, seeming as if filled with hard blood. The paralysis which threatens this type will probably attack his lower limbs, for there is his weak point. His teeth are delicate, and he is liable to ear trouble, which is indicated by dots or small islands on the line of Head under the Mount of Saturn. With every Saturnian subject look for these health difficulties if any disturbance is seen on the line of Life. A grille or cross-bars on the Mount of Saturn will suggest health defects of the type, which can be easily located from nails, etc. In estimating the degree of strength of the type, bring to bear all your knowledge. Texture of the skin will show whether the subject is refined or coarse. 

The finer the grade the less liability of the development of the evil side. Such a subject may be blue or despondent, but not necessarily a pessimist. The coarse texture of skin will make all the Saturnian qualities coarse. It will emphasize the hatred for mankind, will make an inciter of riot; one who wants complete liberty and rebels against restraint of any kind. Fine or medium texture is best. Flexibility of the hand will greatly modify the severity of the type. The elastic mind will not so readily yield to gloom, despondency, or bad instincts as the unyielding mind, shown by the stiff hand. The Saturnian is naturally stingy, and the stiff hand adds greatly to this tendency, while the flexible hand takes away from it. A flexible hand will make the subject likely to enjoy the society of his fellow-men; a stiff hand will make him shun and hate mankind intensely. With the flexible hand look for a good type; with the stiff hand look out for a mean, unenlightened, selfish exhibition of bad qualities and tendencies. If his hand has flabby consistency, his laziness will make him useless. He will indulge all his morbid tendencies, for he will not work, and labor might throw off some of his bad side. Being lazy and still possessing the qualities of his type, he will talk a great deal, will rail at capital, trusts, and all things which are successful, and from this class of lazy Saturnians often come the anarchists who throw bombs. Soft hands will be a slight improvement over the flabby. This subject will not be quite so lazy and will have higher ideals. Elastic consistency is the best, for it will show a proper amount of energy, which will keep the liver more active and reduce the gloom and morbidity of the subject. He will have the elastic qualities of mind and method, the intelligent energy which will lift him out of much of his difficulty. Hard hands, again, coarsen the type and emphasize its bad qualities. This over-energy will cause him to push his already unpleasant views to excess; the stubborn brain will oppose progress and invention, and will clamor for a return of the "good old days." This fellow is the chronic opposer of everything. No matter what it is, he is against it. He will be stingy, narrow, ignorant, and superstitious. The color of the hand is of much importance. Yellow is expected, for there is an excess of bile. The yellower the hand the "yellower" the point of view of the subject. Gloom, melancholy, distorted views, rancor, irritability, intense nervousness, and even criminality will be found if yellow color is pronounced. White color is often found. This makes a subject cold, repellent, and unattractive. He will strongly incline to fly from the society of his fellows, will be shunned wherever he goes, and being sensitive, this will add to his hatred of men, while his cutting remarks will make him more disagreeable. He cannot succeed in anything where he must come in contact with the public. A cold Saturnian is a picture of misery, and this subject is likely to be bad. Pink color will show a better state of health and a more cheerful and better Saturnian. To him all things will not be hopeless. The bright vivacity of pink color will lift and lighten the veil of gloom with which the Saturnian is enveloped, and there will be no such chance for a malevolent creature as with yellow or white color. Red is also good. It shows the increased ardor peculiar to the color, also indicating better health and strength, which reduces the gloom and brightens the subject. 

The Mount Of Saturn. 

Part 4 Unless there are other things present which red qualities might influence, red is a good color. Blue color will show liability to hemorrhoids and varicose veins, as well as heart disease, and if a grille is on the Mount of Saturn or cross-bars with blue color, you may be sure of piles, possibly of varicose veins. Look to the veins on the back of the hand for further confirmation. Nails are important to consider for both character and disease. The short, critical nail on a bad Saturnian will be a poor accompaniment. All the mean, critical qualities of this nail will be added to the disagreeable qualities of the type. Critical nails on even a good Saturnian are an unpleasant indication, and will make him cranky and pronounced in his views. 

The best nail is the broad healthy one, which will tend to give better health and consequently better temper. The narrow nail of delicate constitution does not help his condition, nor does it make him any more agreeable. Consumption and heart-disease nails will show these diseases present, though not being difficulties peculiar to the type, their presence would not be expected. If seen, use them as denoting their peculiar trouble. Fluted and brittle nails are expected, as nervousness and paralysis are health defects of the type. Judge the degree which the trouble has reached by the extent of change in the nail. Beginning at the white spots, through all the various stages to the brittle turned-back nail, you can tell how far the difficulty has progressed. In all nails first determine what the nail indicates, its degree of development, and then apply it to the Saturnian qualities which will give the correct reading. 

If it is a health indication, think whether the trouble is peculiar to the type; if it is, the danger is greater than if it is not. Hair on the hands will tell by its presence and color how hardy the subject is. Black hair will add tricky tendencies to a Saturnian, blond color will make him more likely to be frank and trustworthy. Gauge the amount of hair found, its color and fineness, and use these hair qualities in judging those of the type. The hand as a whole must be considered, for if the fingers be in excess of the palm it will show that the mental world is in excess. This will make the subject a student and scholar, but he will not be much of a business person. He will write learned books, make a good teacher, but will not be a money-maker. 

If the middle portion of the hand is most pronounced the abstract world rules, and he will find success in business. If the lower third of the hand is developed grosser qualities will be added to the Saturnian and make him a very bad person. If one of the three worlds is absent and the other two developed, work out the combination. If it is mental and baser worlds with the middle absent, you know that a visionary Saturnian, who is ruled by bad, earthy qualities, is present, without the good influence of the middle world. Use this same reasoning with the other worlds which are present or absent. Note also the phalanges of the finger. If the first is longest the mental world is the strongest. 

The subject will be a student and a thinker inclined to superstition and fond of occult sciences. The second phalanx of the finger longest will show that farming, agriculture, scientific investigations, chemistry, physics, history, and mathematics are the things most to his taste. This is the medium world and the business side of the Saturnian is shown here. With this second phalanx longest he will be able to gain a livelihood from the pursuit of the vocations peculiar to the type, and should be advised to go into such occupations and pursue these studies. If the third phalanx is longest, the baser attributes will be in the ascendency. 

As the Saturnian is not sensual we cannot attribute sensualism to him from the long third phalanx. The baser quality which belongs to the type is money-worship. If the type is good and the third phalanx long you can say he is only economical. If the type is coarse or bad and third phalanx long it means miserliness. If this third phalanx is thick it will make him less studious, if it is waist-like he will pursue with great eagerness the investigation of the studies for which he has peculiar aptitude. If the finger is bent it adds shrewdness to the Mount and the Saturnian qualities. If the finger is very short he is not a Saturnian, and entirely lacks seriousness and balance. Note whether the apex of the Mount leans toward Jupiter; if it does the wisdom of Saturn will be added to the Jupiterian ambitions, pride and love of command. If the apex lies toward Apollo it will lend soberness and wisdom to the Apollonian qualities. 

In either of these cases the severity of the morbidness of Saturn is diminished, for he gives himself over to the other Mounts. If the apex is in the centre of the Mount all his interest is centred in himself and is uninfluenced by the qualities of the other Mounts. If the finger leans toward Jupiter it will give off some of the strength of Saturn to Jupiter. Thus Jupiter will become wise and cautious as a leader. If the finger leans toward Apollo some of the Saturnian soberness will be drawn toward Apollo and he will become more quiet and careful. You must note the finger tips. If all the tips are of one shape and Saturn's tip is different, it means that Saturn will have the qualities of his tip, the other fingers those of the tips they have. 

This is very useful if the fingers be conic, for a conic tip to Saturn alone with all other tips square or spatulate, would make the balance wheel weaker than the rest of the fingers. If the other fingers are conic and Saturn conic also, it does not throw him out of balance. The more pointed the tip of Saturn, the more idealism enters into the subject. Superstition is rampant, and he is ruled by dreams, signs, and omens. This is especially true if the first phalanx be long as well as pointed. The character is more erratic, and the balance wheel not so powerful. If the tip be square you find practical common-sense, and the subject becomes quiet, less superstitious, and inclines to soberness and even melancholy if very square. Note which phalanx is the longest. A conic tip and long second phalanx will give idealism to the attributes of the second phalanx and affect their operation. In like manner it will affect both the first and third phalanges if they are longest. The Mount Of Saturn. 

Part 5 Square tips will make the farming, chemistry, medicine, physics, or mathematics of the second phalanx very practical, useful, and likely to be pro ductive of money results. It will add greatly to the economy or miserliness of the third phalanx, and take away from the superstition of the first. Spatulate tips will add activity and originality to the Saturnian wisdom and soberness, will impel the subject to mingle with his fellows, be more active, and will make him a great worker, if he is a farmer. If a chemist, it will lead him to seek new compounds, if a doctor, new treatments, if a mathematician, new systems for figuring, and it will give great activity in all these operations. 

The individual phalanges must be judged, and spatulate qualities added to them as found developed. The spatulate tip is the broadest of all; it will thus give the greatest seriousness to the finger. The spatulate balance wheel will be the strongest balance of alt. If the Saturnian type be very pronounced with this spatulate tip (100), the subject will be gloomy, morose, sullen, and hard to get along with, for he will push his disagreeable qualities with spatulate activity and originality. If the finger be very deficient with a conic tip, the subject will be led by everyone and will have no stamina whatever (101 two illustrations). The balance wheel is entirely lacking, and even a good thumb will not help this subject, for he is flighty and entirely untrustworthy. SPATULATE TIP ON SATURN FINGER No. 100. SPATULATE TIP ON SATURN FINGER. . MOUNT AND FINGER OF SATURN DEFICIENT No. 101A. MOUNT AND FINGER OF SATURN DEFICIENT. . FINGER OF SATURN DEFICIENT No. 101B. FINGER OF SATURN DEFICIENT. 

If the fingers are knotty, the qualities of analysis and reasoning will be present. They will make Saturnian qualities more pronounced and add to the seriousness of the subject. Always a careful type, knotty fingers will make them more careful and slow and with knots, there will be no such thing as impulse or sentiment. A natural doubter, the Saturnian with knotty fingers will be an absolute skeptic, he will be analytical in his agricultural and scientific pursuits, and a methodical person. The knotty-fingered Saturnian makes a good judge, for he is wise, not governed by sentiment, and analytical. Conic tips lessen the intensity of knotty fingers. Square tips make them practical, spatulate tips, active and original. All these combinations of tips will be seen on knotty-fingered Saturnians, and life to this subject is serious and real. Smooth fingers make a Saturnian impulsive, a lover of the beautiful, and his musical nature becomes prominent.

If the tips be conic this is most pronounced, if the tips be square the artistic side becomes practical, and with spatulate tips spatulate qualities are present. The smooth-fingered Saturnian is a decidedly happier type, and not so liable to despondency. He tends strongly toward superstition and becomes proficient in occult sciences. Long fingers give him detail and minutiae. If the first phalanx be long, he goes into the depths of mysticism and superstition. With the second phalanx long, he will not omit a detail in the scientific studies or the agricultural pursuits which he follows. Short fingers will give the quick thought and action peculiar to them. The Saturnian qualities will be present but will be operated with short-fingered quickness. If the tips be conic, the short-fingered impulse will be very great, if square it will decrease in degree, and spatulate tips will add the fiery impetuosity belonging to these tips. Short fingers will make the Saturnian less careful in dress but also less repellent and more approachable. Long fingers make him tidier, but the suspicion of long fingers leads him to distrust and dislike mankind, and he is hard to get acquainted with. The thumb tells what support will and reason are to give to the subject. A short thumb will show a weak character and will make the Saturnian racillating. 

A large thumb will add to the gravity and ceterciizatxoci of the type With the thumb thoroughly understood it will not be bard to apply whatever thumb is fosced to the Saturian qualities of the subject. The excentt of oceernsirmtion. gange by Length of the will phalanx, what kind. by the shape of the phalanx. for was reason is present, by the Length of the second phalanx, and that kind by the shape of this phalanx. Whether will or reason are balanced, is determined by the comparative lengths of the phalanges. These will all tell the amount and kind of force pushing the Saturnian qualities forward. Pointed thumbs take away from the strength of the type, square or spatnlate add greatly to it. Note carefully which Mount type is secondary and which world guides it from the phalanges of its finger. In this way having found in which world the Saturnian subject is most prominent, you will be able to judge what side of the secondary Mount will operate to aid him. The Saturnian is predisposed to suicide as an end to his woes. Always more or less gloomy by nature, ill-success, sickness, or slighting treatment often casts him into depths of despair from which he sees no relief but death. If he be a high type he may, by mental force, hold himself level. If he be ill or weak in character, a dose of poison will relieve him from suffering. 

See hands of the Chittenden Hotel suicide. In considering the matter of criminology in connection with the types, we find more real criminals come from the Saturnians and Mercurians than from any of the others. There is in these two types an instinct of dislike toward mankind, even if the subjects have only a slightly excessive development. This leads the bad specimens to constantly invade the rights of others. The prisons are occupied by a majority of Saturnians and Mercurians. In examining the crimes for which law-breakers are incarcerated, it becomes apparent that the other types have fallen, often from bad environments or from sudden temptations to do wrong, which have overcome the subject before he has had time to think it over. In these cases the subjects are heartily sorry they transgressed the law, and very infrequently become chronic law-breakers.

They are the so-called criminals who can be reclaimed. The fact is, they were never real criminals. The professional crooks who commit crime at every opportunity, and serve two and three sentences, becoming under the law "habitual criminals," are almost all Saturnians or Mercurians. They are real criminals at heart - mean to do wrong; their hands are against every man, and they live and die planning how to best their fellows. These subjects do not reform in reality - all pretences in this direction are merely to deceive and gain an advantage over the unsuspecting. An interesting fact to note in this matter of criminality is that the two types from which criminals come are the two bilious ones, the Saturnian and Mercurian. Bile seems capable of perverting everything and making it evil; certainly its two types are those from which the most desperate criminals spring. Keep this well in mind in estimating the Saturnian. Do not fall into the error of thinking there are no good Saturnians. Some of the grandest of men, noble, high-minded, and successful, belong to this type. Abraham Lincoln was one. Always do your Saturnian subjects justice; they may be Liucolns; but at the same time do not forget the large number of "Burglar Jims" who belong to the same type.