---
heading: "Chapter 22 Part 1 of The Laws of Scientific Palm Reading Simplified"
title: "The Mount Of Mars"
description: "As single signs, or in combination with each other, the star, triangle, circle, square, single vertical line, or trident strengthen a Mount"
date: 2020-01-18
image: "/photos/objects/hand.jpg"
linkb: "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-22-mercury"
linkbtext: "Chapter 22"
linkf: "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-24-luna"
linkftext: "Chapter 24"
---


THE fifth Mount type is the Martian. He is identified by:
- the 2 Mounts of Mars
- the Upper Mount on the percussion and above the Line of Head
- the Lower Mount under the Line of Life and above the Mount of Venus

The Plain of Mars is located in the centre of the palm, which bears some relation to the Martian type.

In the map, the lower boundary of Lower Mars is the word "aggression," and all under that word belongs to the Mount of Venus.
As single signs or in combination the star, triangle, circle, single vertical line, trident and square, strengthen the Upper Mount of Mars.

The cross-bar, cross, island, dot or grille, show defects of the Mount, either of health or character. Nails, color, etc. will determine which.

All cross lines, stars, crosses or grilles in the Plain of Mars, increase the inflammability and temper of the subject.
Signs on the Lower Mount of Mars must be read on the Influence lines inside of the Life line (113). In the earlier history of Palmistry the Plain of Mars was considered to be the principal part of the Martian development. The Upper Mount was afterwards located and found to be a strong factor, and in later years the Mount of Venus was subdivided so as to give the upper portion to what is now called the Lower Mount of Mars because it is below the Line of Life. 

Any attempt to use only one of these Martian developments to the exclusion of the other, will lead to error, and it is only by the combined use of the two Mounts and the Plain of Mars that you will be able properly to estimate the Martian, a type constantly encountered in very pure development, and which you will find in combination with most of the other types. In gaining the material for this chapter I have taken the most pronounced Martians, and alongside of them, subjects who have been entirely deficient in Martian development, and from these pronounced cases, several thousand in number, I have tabulated what I believe to be an accurate and trustworthy system of handling the type. 

This statement is made here because there has been of late such a diversity of opinion on the subject even among the very best students, that I feel sure all will welcome an elucidation of the Martian question based upon an experience covering many thousand verifications from among the best known Martians in the World. This type embodies the elements of aggression and resistance, and the Martian is consequently a fighter. Do not by any means infer that the Martian always fights with the sword and pistol, or engages in fistic combats, for he is more often found fighting his way against adverse elements and circumstances in the mental or business world. It must not be understood that all Martians will be soldiers (though all true Martians would quickly enlist to fight for a beloved country), but they will always push with vigor anything with which they may be connected, and will more stoutly resist the efforts of those who seek to force them, than will the other types. 

Thus wherever they are found, Martians are those who fight, and the Martian disposition is an aggressive one. In almost all hands we find some Martian development. If we fail to find it, the subject is easily discouraged and overcome in the struggle for existence. The Martian qualities of aggression or resistance are necessary to the completion of any character, for without them the subject will be run over and trampled under foot, and no matter how brilliant or talented he may be, without the Martian fighting qualities, his brilliancy will never be brought before the eyes of the world. There are two kinds of fighters=  those who are the aggressors and force the issue, and those who act in self-defense or resist the pressure brought to bear upon them. This separation of Martian qualities is shown in the Upper Mount of Mars, which indicates resistance (114), and the Lower Mount of Mars, which shows aggressive spirit (115). 

Often you find one of these Mounts largely developed and the other small, in which case the subject will have either great aggression, or great resistance, according as it is the Lower or the Upper Mount which is the larger. Often you find both Mounts very largely developed. In this case you have a large supply of both aggression and resistance, and the subject will push himself forward with great persistence, and will also resist vigorously the attempt of anyone to impose upon him. These subjects with both Mounts large, simply shove themselves over every obstacle and stubbornly resist any attempt to force them clown. They never know when they are beaten, and permit no one to think that defeat is a possibility with them. The strong double Mount is a most advanced Martian development, and when seen, the subject must be classed as a Martian at once. This type is unmistakable. The Plain of Mars, if largely developed, or if much crossed by fine or red lines, will show sudden temper to be present. This development with the other two Mounts large will make a dangerous combination, for it will add inflaminability to the already great aggression and resistance. 

To the Plain of Mars used to be attributed the aggressive qualities which we now ascribe to the I.ower Mount of Mars, for it was observed by the old palmists that sudden tempers which were present with a strong Plain of Mars made the subject flare up and become very aggressive. But this temper soon died, and it has been observed that there is a vast difference between one who steadily and coolly pushes his way over all opposition, and one who simply gets mad and for the time being makes "Rome howl." The ancients fully appreciated the value in human success of this aggressive quality which would force men to overcome opposition at any cost, and when they put forth the rule that "A hollow palm indicates misery, loss of money, and failure in all enterprises," it was because they thought that the hollow palm showed lack of aggression and that its absence would produce these results. The Mount Of Mars. Part 2 In this case the hollow palm did not locate the seat of aggression, and its absence only allowed a lack of temper, which had been confused with real aggression; so the hollow palm is now shorn of its terrors, and is to be found in the hands of very successful people. The absence of the Lower Mount of Mars (116) is much more likely to produce the resulting failure attributed by older palmists to a hollow palm, for without the Lower Mount developed, a subject will allow someone much inferior in attainments to push past him by the sheer force of aggression. 

The three subdivisions of the Martian are resistance (Upper Mars), aggression (Lower Mars), and temper (Plain of Mars). The Martian according to this division becomes a three-sided fellow and you will have no trouble in estimating him properly if you carefully note which formation he has, and in what degree of development. When the Upper Mount of Mars is developed so as to make a curve outwardly at the percussion of the hand (see 114), it is a strong Mount; when, in addition, it is so full that it forms a perceptible pad on the inside of the palm, it is unusually strong. 

When the side of the hand at the percussion is straight, or with a depression where the Mount ought to be, the qualities of the Mount are absent (117). This absence of Martian development is to be noted carefully, for dire results often follow such a deficiency. The Upper Mount of Mars gives to a subject the power of resistance, that is, under all circumstances he is cool, collected, calm, does not lose his head, is equal to emergencies, and does not get discouraged if things go against him. He does not give up fighting even when the chances seem slim, and when knocked down he rises again seemingly unaware of the possibility of defeat. This power of resistance, this faculty of never giving up, often makes the Martian successful over all obstacles. When, on the contrary, this Upper Mount is absent, and the side of the hand fiat or hollow, you know that the subject is easily discouraged, gives up quickly when hard pressed, and lacks resistance. In moments of danger he becomes excited, and when knocked down he does not rise, for he thinks that it is no use to try any more. Thus you can see what a wonderful power this Upper Mount gives through this faculty of resisting, and what a loss the lack of it is. 

In the reading of every hand it must be thoroughly taken into account, for even dull or ordinary persons will push themselves through the world if they do not get discouraged. This deficient Mount is found on the hands of almost all suicides. The subject with only the Upper Mount developed will not force the fighting, will not hunt strife, but will be content to resist opposition, and to overcome oppression when it appears. The Lower Mount of Mars (see 115) will show the subject who pushes his plans to the fullest extent, does not stop to consider other people, but with "hammer and tongs," if necessary, forces himself over and through all opposition. He seeks strife, loves it, and is always the pusher who is full of aggression. Note this point carefully, if you find a hand with the Lower Mount strong and the Upper one lacking, the subject will be a great bluffer, but not having resistance will back down easily if pressed. Having fixed the distinction between aggression, resistance, and temper, we will consider the typical Martian, and judge him as being the aggressor, the resister, or a combination of both, according as the respective Mounts are developed. 

DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF MARS No. 113. DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF MARS. UPPER MOUNT OF MARS DEVELOPED No. 114 UPPER MOUNT OF MARS DEVELOPED. LOWER MOUNT OF MARS DEVELOPED No. 115, LOWER MOUNT OF MARS DEVELOPED. LOWER MOUNT OF MARS DEFICIENT No. 116. LOWER MOUNT OF MARS DEFICIENT. UPPER MOUNT OF MARS DEFICIENT No. 117. UPPER MOUNT OF MARS DEFICIENT. 

The Martian is of medium height, very strongly built, muscular looking, carries himself erect, shoulders back, and has the appearance of one ever ready to defend himself. His head is small, bullet shaped, with an unusually large development at the base of the brain. The back of the neck is broad and, in a pronounced specimen, developed much above the average. The face is round, the skin thick and strong, red in color, and often presenting a mottled appearance. The hair is short, stiff, sometimes curly and of an auburn or red color. 

The beard is short and harsh. The eyes are large and bold looking, with a bright expression, dark in color, and with the whites often bloodshot, showing the great strength of his blood supply. The mouth is large and firm, the lips thin with the under one slightly the thicker. The teeth are small, regular, strong, and yellowish in color. The brows grow thick, straight, and low over the eyes, giving often the appearance of a scowl. The nose is long, straight, or of the Roman type, the chin firm and strong, often turning up slightly at the end. 

The ears are small and set close to the head, the red color of skin being quite prominent around them, this red often turning to a purple, congested appearance with strongly marked subjects. The neck is short and thick, connecting the head with a finely developed pair of shoulders, broad and muscular, with large muscles running down the back and a big expansive chest. In this chest is a pair of large, strong lungs which send forth a big commanding voice full of resonance and power. The legs are short but stout and muscular, the bones of the body are big and strong, the feet are broad and the instep inclined to be flat, making the subject walk in a proud, determined manner. Altogether he shows himself one well able to force his way through the world, mentally if he can, physically if he must. 

The Martian by his very appearance shows his true character, full of fight, either aggressively or in self-defence, mentally or physically, a strong, robust constitution, and one ardent in all things. The Martian is first of all brave, to him the conflict brings no thought of danger. Consequently the Martian makes an excellent soldier. If an army could be marshalled which should be composed of typical Martians, there would be no such thing as defeat possible to them, it would be victory or death. (Leonidas at the pass of Thermopylae undoubtedly had such a band and their work was tinged with the true Martian spirit.) 

The Martian has also robust health, consequently is naturally energetic, and with good health is not so likely to have his vital forces sapped by inertia. The Mount Of Mars. Part 3 This gives him an added power, which pushes forward his aggressive side and makes him able more readily to resist discouragements. As a soldier it also makes him able to endure the fatigue of any campaign, and to push forward by rapid marches to seek and smite his opponent. His vigorous constitution fills him with the desire to accomplish whatever he sets out to do, and his energy makes him put forward the utmost effort to gain success. He is exceedingly generous in the use of his money, caring for wealth only for what it will buy for him. He is one who loves to have friends and admirers, and generally succeeds in gaining them. He is exceedingly devoted to these friends and will fight for them, as well as spend his money freely with them and in their behalf. He is not always refined and delicate in his ways, but is often brusque and lacking in tact. He is well-meaning, however, and while he sometimes accomplishes his purposes in a vigorous manner, his typical characteristics must be taken into account and you must not expect him to be always a Chesterfield. He is determined, and the stronger the type the more this is accentuated. Do not think you can oppose a Martian with impunity, and be sure that if you do oppose him there will be a fight on your hands. 

The Martian can be reasoned with and coaxed, but never driven, and he is exceedingly amorous. His strong blood current and big muscular development speak of an exuberance of health, and fill him with the fire of passion, and the opposite sex becomes very attractive. When he falls in love it is with all the intensity of his strong nature, and he simply proceeds to storm the heart of bis charmer, as he does the works of an enemy, and this Martian fire and dash so astound the object of his love that she is apt to surrender to the assault. No sickly sentimentality takes part in his wooing, it is audacity and vigor from start to finish. The Martian is domineering, especially if the Lower Mount is developed. 

Remember opposition rouses all of his fighting qualities, and this is his strong side; so all other types do well to mollify him, leading him by tact and diplomacy, rather than trying to force him. The Martian is a heavy eater. It takes plenty of fuel to feed the fires of his strong body, so it takes a great deal of food and the heartiest kind at that. He wants plenty of rare beef, potatoes, eggs, cabbage, turnips, and all of the more solid kinds of food. Salads and dainties that attract the epicurean taste do not suffice for him. He is very fond of games that require physical strength and power. Wrestling, boxing, football, baseball, and all kindred sports strongly appeal to him. The rougher the sport and the greater the strife, the better he likes it, and the better he succeeds. His is a big nature, he is not narrow in his views, and in all games or sports he wants absolute fairness to rule and the best man to win. He is primarily an active type, so those things which are accomplished by daring and energy seem to him the real things. The student and the philosopher appear to him small and insignificant. The achievements accomplished before the eyes of the world are what appeal to him. The Martian is found in every walk in life. His strong characteristics are daily felt in the mental world, the business community, the army, the church, the state - everywhere. He must be put into occupations and surroundings where he can work off his surplus energy either in pushing his affairs or fighting in the field. 

To put a Martian where he must be under restraint would be like stopping the safety-valve on a boiler and crowding on steam. Outdoor active occupations best suit him, and one confined to office routine should have a gymnasium near at hand. Wherever he may be, in whatever walk in life, he is always the same ardent, strong fellow, proud to a degree, fond of show, an imposing figure and the hero of the masses who bow down to his superior strength and daring. As a painter the Martian will choose battle scenes, hunting scenes, or games of sport. As a reader he chooses tales of war or strife, and never tires of the heroes who have come down through the traditions of the ages. As a musician he loves music full of fire and pronounced rhythm, and not the plaintive love song. A brass band most strongly appeals to him. As a speaker he deals in strong sentences, and loves to tell of battles and physical prowess. In everything he is the same, and his Martian ideas tinge his horizon with their ardent strength. 

The Martian has a bad side, which becomes so, not from the fact that he is inherently a criminal, but from the intensity and ardor of his nature. In order that a Martian may develop his best side, it is essential that he be refined in every way possible. Everything that tends to coarsen him makes him more brutal, and with his strong tendencies, brutality makes him bad. On his bad side he becomes lascivious, a drunkard, and, as the worst development, a murderer; and this common type is not at all hard to distinguish. The hand is hard, stiff, skin coarse, color very red, capillaries big and coarse, fingers short, with the third phalanges thick, nails short and brittle, and the Mounts of Mars very large. The Plain of Mars will be either high or badly crossed. In some cases a large single cross is seen in the Plain of Mars indicating uncontrollable temper. On this hand you will find a big first phalanx of the thumb, often the clubbed formation, and quite frequently the spatu-late thumb. This Martian will be short in stature, the face very red, eyes blood-shot, the skin spotted and with a purplish tinge, mouth twisted, hair a dirty red, and ears long. Such a Martian is the kind who lives only to gratify his low passions, and to him there is nothing but brutality. When he is crossed in love he murders, and either by using an ax, a club, or a knife - even the act of murder he brutalizes as much as possible. When he steals it is to gratify his passions, so while he is bad it is the wickedness of animalism. he Mount Of Mars. Part 4 He does not steal because he is a thief and the act of stealing is a pleasure to him, but merely because he wants to use the proceeds of his felony to appease his appetites. 

Surround a crooked Mercurian with everything he wants, and he will steal because he loves to. Give a bad Martian all he wants to eat and drink and he will not steal. The Martian is always predisposed to marry. He makes a devoted husband, though an ardent one, and is particular to choose a good-looking wife. The Venusian women please him best, as he wants a purely feminine type as a wife. He himself possesses enough masculinity for the whole family. The health difficulties of the Martian are a predisposition to fevers, blood disorders owing to the richness and abundance of his blood supply, throat trouble, bronchitis, laryngitis, and kindred difficulties with the bronchial tubes. These troubles are shown by grilles or cross-bars on the Upper Mount of Mars, emphasized by color, nails, and other health indications. Health difficulties are not shown on the Lower Mount. Health difficulties marked on the lower third of the Upper Mount of Mars and the upper third of the Mount of the Moon indicate intestinal troubles even going as far as tuberculosis of the intestines. This I have many times confirmed. The various qualities of the hand play their part with this type as with all the others. The texture of the skin is important for the reason that refinement elevates the Martian. If you find fine texture of skin, you know that coarseness and brutality are not so likely, and that while the subject will be intense he will be more delicate in his methods than if he is unrefined. Very fine texture is not common to the Martian, although it is found. I once saw a typical Martian with very fine textured skin and found that he was a minister and very intellectual; another Martian with the same fineness I found to be a celebrated wrestler, very cool and levelheaded, and not at all brutal (118). The medium texture is often found on the Martian who moves in good society, and it shows him to be a thoroughly manly man. With this texture is most often found the Upper Mount leading and only a moderate Lower Mount.

This combination shows the power of intellectual and refined resistance under discouragement, with just enough aggression to keep up the necessary balance. Coarse texture will, by taking away refinement, make a loud and disagreeable fellow, so intense that his society is not sought. Flexibility of the hand will show the elastic mind back of Martian qualities. A very flexible hand will refine and elevate the mentality of the type, and make the subject more versatile. It will also make him less intense, not likely to be disagreeable, but more apt to fly to extremes, especially of temper. Great flexibility is not often found with this type, for while they are clever they do not think as quickly as other types. The medium flexibility is often seen and shows a balance between the elastic mind and its opposite. This subject is calm, clear-headed, evenly balanced, and not so likely to fly into a temper, especially if the Upper Mount is strong. If the Lower Mount is large he has greater aggression. The stiff hand will make him dense and inelastic in mind, and being naturally slow, he becomes with this stiff hand very set in his ways. The stiff hand will be found on an obstinate, unintelligent, quarrelsome fellow. WRESTLER'S HAND No. 118. WRESTLER'S HAND. The consistency of the hand will show you whether the Martian fighting qualities will be put into operation, or remain inoperative. 

The flabby hand will show that sheer laziness is present, and while the subject may flare up under some passing excitement, the energy is merely temporary. With the Lower Mount strong he will be a very aggressive talker, but will push his way spasmodically. Flabby consistency is not often found with Martian hands. Soft hands show that inertia is present, but that it may be overcome by determination. Elastic hands show the best consistency for a Martian, for he will have intelligent energy back of him, and will only push his strong qualities within reasonable limits. He will never be lazy, is a thoroughly masculine subject, and will have developed one of the Martian's best qualities, energy. Hard hands will coarsen and lower the type. 

The hard brain indicated by the hard hand cannot adapt itself to new conditions, and gets into ruts. This consistency makes a terrible fellow of a subject with the Lower Mount developed, as it adds intense energy to aggression, which is a most formidable combination. Color in the hands is important. Red is the normal color in a strong specimen. This shows rich blood, the strong heart, and the greatest amount of vitality. If it is very pronounced it is dangerous, for it will make the subject so intense that he knows no bounds. As a sensualist he will be extreme, and if he belongs to the bad type, he will commit any excess, and even crime to further his ends. These are the men who murder from jealousy. Pink color tones down these qualities, and reduces the danger greatly. The normal strength of the pink color will not lead to physical excesses, nor to the inflammable temper shown by red color. The subject will be milder, less likely to fight, more evenly balanced, and in every way a better Martian. 


White color with this type is abnormal. When found the Martian is much reduced in strength. Even a strong Mount will be diminished in its operation by white color. Coldness is the opposite of the red qualities, and these belong typically to the Martian. When white color is found it indicates such a reduction of the blood current that it must come from ill-health. In this case tone down your estimate of the degree of intensity of the subject. Do not give him even the full measure of resistance or aggression that the size of his Mounts would seem to justify. The Mount Of Mars. Part 5 Yellow color is sometimes found and tells of the crossness, the nervousness, the fits of blues that come from excess of bile. This will make a strong specimen of the type very mean, and from this bilious combination alone do we get the really criminal Martian. With a strong Lower Mount, a high or rayed Plain of Mars, the bilious subject will be a quarrelsome person, one always declaring himself to be misused and abused by the world. 

With the Martian's rich blood supply and strong heart, if the blood current becomes poisoned with bile it will make him vicious. The nails must be closely examined. The broad nail of a strong constitution is expected, and will be most often found. The narrow nail is not common, and tells of a more delicate person. Short, critical nails will add materially to the fighting qualities, and if very short make the subject pugnacious in the extreme. With a large Lower Mount and very short nails you have a person who fights everybody and all the time. He cannot keep away from strife, and is either in it himself or has everybody around him fighting. Color must be observed in the nails; red, pink, white, yellow, and blue each telling the story of color qualities present. 

The nails must be examined for health to see if fluted or brittle, which formations make the subject a nervous Martian, and pretty hard to get along with. 

With this type look for the nail showing throat and bronchial delicacy, for these are difficulties which beset the Martian. When these nails are seen on this type it means danger, and must be used to warn the subject against colds and exposure from carelessness. The hair on the hands will be most often red, auburn, or blond. In all of these colors judge the degree of strength added to the type by the depth of color. Red hair will make an inflammable subject, liable to sudden violent temper, and one who will lose control of himself under excitement. If the Lower Mount be strong, red hair will be as bad as short nails, and if both these should be found, then it will be absolutely no use trying to get along with this subject. Auburn color decreases the intensity and makes the subject less likely to "fly off the handle." Blond hair will again reduce the ardor of the type and make it more phlegmatic, calm, and less excitable. Blond hair reduces the intensity of Martian qualities more than any other color, while black shows the vivacity and spontaneity of its qualities, and to a degree lights up the Martian fires in a subject. The hand as a whole will tell you of the mental, practical, or baser worlds which rule the subject. This observation of the whole hand is important with the Martian, for the reason that this is the first Mount type which has not a finger to guide us. 

The Head line, together with the length of fingers and the general balance of the hand, must be used in connection with the individual phalanges of all four fingers. If the hand as a whole shows the mental world to rule, you will find that the first phalanx of the four fingers will correspond. Then note the Head line to see whether it is clear, well marked, and colored, and by this combination class your subject as a Martian ruled by the mental world. He will then develop his peculiar traits in the world of mind, and will be good as a lawyer, minister, debater, politician, and in kindred occupations. If the middle portion of the hand is best developed, it will show that the practical world is strong, and the subject will be a Martian business man, full of fight, push, and energy, not subject to discouragement, and consequently not likely to give up when hard pressed. These subjects are most successful in the business world, and more pronouncedly so if they are refined. If the lower third of the hand be best developed, then the animal desires, already strong in the subject, will take their lowest form and he will become vulgar in the extreme. Such an one commits crime to gratify his appetites. He may be successful in business, but he will be low in his tastes. Note the secondary Mounts, and which side of them is best developed, for this will tell what forces are behind the subject to drive his already strong qualities into action. These matters consider from the other Mounts, and the phalanges of the individual fingers. Pointed finger-tips with this type will tell you that idealism will rule, in which case your Martian will be much less practical and reliable, and apt to rush into ill-conceived ventures. Pointed tips are, however, not often found on strong Martians. Conic tips are often found, for the Martian is fond of beauty and of artistic things. 

He likes dress and home decorations, and notwithstanding his strong nature there is a tinge of conic quality often found. Square tips are frequent, for the Martian is eminently practical. If he be a soldier these tips will show common-sense, and his commissary department will be well equipped. In any vocation square tips will make him practical, and even if he has great aggression he will use and guide it sensibly. Spatulate tips will give great activity, and everything that adds this to a Martian puts him in danger of excess. Link great aggression (Lower Mars) and great activity (spatulate tips) with the other quality of these tips, originality, and you have an active and aggressive fellow who is hunting original ways to expend his force. He is trying new ways to do old things and becomes a person that wears out everybody around him. Spatulate tips will make the Martian a great explorer, a brilliant and forceful general, and a successful business man, if a good clear Head line is present to give self-control and good judgment. Knotty fingers will show that reason and analysis will guide the subject. If only the first knots are developed he will be unusually intelligent, the mind will be well ordered, and his information systematized. 

If the second knot is developed he will be neat in his dress, tidy in his surroundings, and in whatever vocation he is found you may be sure he will be regular and methodical, especially so if the fingers be square throughout their length. If both knots be developed it will make him an analyzer who does nothing from impulse, but reasons always. Smooth fingers will add to his love of beauty, and make him impulsive and quick. He will not stop to reason out everything, but will rely on first impressions and his intuitions. He will be fond of dress, of flowers, paintings that depict war scenes, and will love stirring music. Smooth fingers are a danger to this type, for, already very spontaneous, he needs only thoughtlessness to make him wild, so in a subject who has smooth fingers and a strong Martian development, see if a clear Head line is present to give self-control. 

It is a good thing to find knotty fingers on a Martian, as they make him careful, but you find more subjects with smooth fingers, as the type is naturally impulsive. The Mount Of Mars. Part 6 Long fingers will show that the subject is fond of minutiae and detail. If he be a soldier he will plan his campaigns with the utmost care, he will look after the equipment of his men, and will see that they are amply provided with proper food. Not a detail that can add to the efficiency of the service will be overlooked. He will be neat in his dress and require his soldiers to keep their equipments constantly bright; he will be suspicious of those with whom he deals, and does not implicitly trust anyone, therefore he himself sees that his instructions are carried out. 

The long-fingered Martian becomes a slower subject. He is not moved to act under impulse, and who does not make rapid and impetuous dashes, but proceeds always with care and caution. 

His aggressiveness will not be so strong, for he will be particular that all the little things are attended to, and will thus lose part of the pushing qualities contributed by a strong Lower Mount, which does not generally stop to consider minutiae. Short fingers make the Martian a fiery, impetuous fellow, who dashes ahead without stopping to consider where he will come out, and with the short-fingered quickness in both thought and action he rushes pell-mell through the world, either achieving great success or constantly committing blunders. With a big Lower Mount and very short fingers, he will see only the object he wishes to reach, and not the things which stand between. 

Impulse and quick thought are his guides, and a very aggressive person who is also thoughtless and careless of the feelings of others can do endless damage. The dash and push of such a Martian strike terror to more timid brethren, and thus he accomplishes his ends by very audacity. But there is always the danger that an opponent may be cool, calculating, and strong, and this combination can resist a daring charge and bring to grief the short-fingered Martian. The thumb will show what determination is back of the Martian. If he be a refined type, we need a refined thumb, which will make him rely more on tact than on brute force. 

There is generally found the thumb which shows muscular strength and robust energy. You do not often find the delicate, refined thumb, but will often see a broad first phalanx, or a paddle-shaped phalanx, with a waist-like second phalanx. These will be seen on high-grade Martians and will show great determination, coupled with tactful reasoning qualities, which will reduce the brutality of a big Lower Mount, but will not lessen the aggression, for it will operate with just as great strength of will, but governed by good reasoning power and tact. Big long thumbs will give strength to the subject; small thumbs will make them sputter and "bluff," but they will back down if vigorously attacked. Pointed thumbs make the subject impressionable and weaken the type materially. Even a strong Lower Mount will be spoiled by a pointed thumb. Square or spatulate tips to the thumb give great common-sense, or great activity and originality to the will. They produce most determined subjects, and add great strength to the type. These subjects must always be coaxed; they can never be driven. The clubbed thumb belongs to the brutal Martian hand. 

Denominated the "murderer's thumb," and showing the brutal obstinacy that will kill from blind fury, we see that it is on the fighting type this thumb properly belongs. Always feel that the clubbed thumb, on a strongly Martian hand, hard and red, with short fingers and short first phalanges, will make the subject likely to give way to the first sudden fury that may seize him. Clubbed thumbs are found on all kinds of hands, telling their story of obstinacy and strong tendency to brutality, either hereditary or acquired, but in the Martian type they reach the highest danger-point, and must be given the most careful consideration. The Head line, by its clearness, straightness, and even color, will be a great factor with the Martian type. With a subject who is likely to be inflammable, there is great need of self-control and good judgment. These qualities are abundantly supplied by a good Head line, and in the final summing up of your Martian type this test must be applied to see if they are present, and if in such degree that their full benefit will be assured. In handling this strong type always remember that he is a fighter, that he may fight physically or mentally, and that you must distinguish between aggression and resistance. With these ideas in mind, and the material in his hand to judge by, apply all the tests to him, in order to determine the degree of his Martian development and the forces back of him that will either add to or take away from his strength. After a careful study of this chapter I am sure no mistakes will be made with the Martian type.