+++
title=  "The Mount Of Jupiter"
heading=  "Chapter 19"
image=  "/photos/objects/hand.jpg"
description=  "As single signs, or in combination with each other, the star, triangle, circle, square, single vertical line, or trident strengthen a Mount"
linkb=  "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-02"
linkbtext=  "Chapter 2"
linkf=  "/research/benham/palmistry/part-1/chapter-20-saturn"
linkftext=  "Chapter 20"
+++

As single signs, or in combination with each other, the star, triangle, circle, square, single vertical line, or trident strengthen a Mount.

As single signs, or in combination with each other, the grille, cross-bars, cross, island, or dot indicate defects of the Mount either of health or of character, the main lines, chance lines, color, etc., will determine which.

There are a few variations of this rule as applied to some of the Mounts. At the beginning of each chapter on the Mount types will be found an illustration, giving the indications as applied to it. Note these carefully for variations.

Entering now upon the consideration of the seven types of humanity, we find the first type is the Jupiterian, identified by a developed Mount and finger of Jupiter.

In a previous chapter I have told how to judge Mounts, in order to determine which one is the strongest, as well as how to proceed when several Mounts seem equally well developed. To understand this is, of course, essential to proficiency.
The Jupiterian is ambitious and a leader of men. His commanding presence and the love he has for high positions make him often a politician.

He is found also in the army, for here again is the opportunity to hold commanding position and to lead men.
In the church he is prominent as well. Religion is one of the strong attributes of Jupiterians, and they will be found holding all shades of opinion, from the most rigidly orthodox to a breadth dangerously near skepticism.
The tip of the Jupiter finger will indicate which extreme. Ambition, love of command, pride in position, religion, honor, love of nature, are main forces with the Jupiterian, and these mould his manners and actions in every walk in life. There are many Jupherians to be found, and in practice you will have much to do with them. They represent a good type and a strong one.

DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF JUPITER No. 93. DISTINGUISHING MARKS ON THE MOUNT OF JUPITER. When the Mount of Jupiter is found full and strong, apex centrally located, finger long and strong, with color of hand pink or red (94), you have located a Jupiterian. In this generation you will not often find a pure specimen of the type; there is generally an accompanying mixture of other types; but the one I here describe is a pure Jupiterian, the leading qualities of the type being always found present where the large Mount of Jupiter is found, although when other Mounts are also well developed it is accompanied by added qualities belonging to other types. The pure Jupiterian is of medium height. He is not the tallest of the seven types; that distinction belongs to the Saturnian; neither is he the shortest, for this honor belongs to the Mercurian. He is, however, a large man, very strongly built and inclined to be fleshy. His flesh is solid and not mere fat, nor does it partake of the spongy softness of the Lunar type. His bones are large, strong, and well able to support his weight. He has a smooth, clear skin, which inclines to be fine in texture, pink in color, and healthy looking. His eyes are large and expressive, pupils are clear and dilate under the play of the emotions. There is no fierce look in his eyes, - the expression is mild and almost melting, bespeaking honesty and a kindly spirit. JUPITERIAN HAND No. 94. JUPITERIAN HAND. The upper lids of the eyes are thick, looking as if somewhat swollen, and the lashes are long and curl up gracefully at the ends. The eyebrows are arched and the hairs grow evenly, giving the brows a clearly defined outline. The nose is straight and well formed, tending to be large in size, and often Roman in shape. The mouth is large, the lips full and red, and owing to the position of the teeth the upper lip is slightly prominent. The teeth are strong and white, but grow long and narrow, the two front teeth being longer than is usual. The cheeks are well rounded, so the cheek bones are not to be seen. The chin is long and firm, with a dimple at the point. The ears are well formed, regular, and set close to the head, which rests on a well-shaped, thick neck of medium length and strong looking. The back and shoulders are fleshy and squarely set. The legs and feet are shapely and of medium size, but strong and firm. The walk is stately and dignified. The hair is brown or running into chestnut; in women of the type, grows long, is abundant and fine in quality, inclining to be curly. The Jupiterian perspires freely, especially on top of the head, from ordinary exertion. This often leads to baldness early in life. As he is of a vigorous constitution he has considerable hair on his body, which, you remember, is a sign of strength. The chest of the Jupiterian is well developed, and his large lungs are bellows from which is forced a rich, musical voice, which is just the voice to give words of command, or speak to and influence a multitude; helping to make a Jupiterian the natural leader that he is. It is not hard to see why such a personality as the Jupiterian should command followers, for his strong and robust manhood proves attractive, and confidence in his strength at once moves men to desire an alliance with him. He is designed to command; nature has given him the strength and attractiveness that will enable him to secure and to lead followers. The Jupiterian, therefore, is classed as belonging to a. good type. It is not possible to keep out all alloy, however, even in this type, for there are bad Jupiterians who pervert their rich endowments, and these will be considered later. The object in mentioning this now is to avoid conveying the idea that all Jupiterians are good. The type has its faults, but the one above described is the Jupiterian as he was planned and intended to be. The natural build of the type makes these people self-confident. They are conscious of their strength, and this gives them reliance in their ability. They depend upon themselves, work out their own plans, and thus do not have the habit of asking advice. They are inclined to bluster and talk loud, not in a quarrelsome way, it is true, but in a manner full of self-confidence and self-assertion. They are aware of the influence they exert, and it naturally makes them vain. This vanity knows the power of the rich, musical voice in swaying men, and they like to hear the sound of this voice as well as to see it shaping the views of others. Leadership is always uppermost in their minds. The Mount Of Jupiter. Part 2 With all his vanity the Jupiterian is warm-hearted. He has a fellow-feeling for humanity that exhibits itself in practical ways. A word of comfort from so strong a person to one in distress does a world of good, and the kindly spirit he shows to all who appeal to him binds closer the following he attracts. Nor is his kindness confined to words, for he gives as well, and is generous and charitable. These Jupiterian beneficences are dispensed in a manly, open-hearted way that makes the recipients feel that the donor is glad to give. Here again his nature furnishes him help to carry out the things he was created to do - viz., to attract and lead. The Jupiterian, in his capacity as a leader, would, if unjust, inflict harm in many ways upon his fellows. With his big, manly way of looking at things he is eminently just, and strives to encourage and support fairness and business honesty. He is a dashing fellow, one who has much attraction for the opposite sex, and will always be found gallant and courteous. He is extravagant. To him power and rule mean more than money, and while he obtains large sums from his enterprises, he does not hoard it, and has a contempt for anything resembling small dealing or miserliness. He is inherently religious. Created to lead his fellow-men and to have dominion over them, it is apparent that the Creator gave him instincts which would make him good, and safeguard him against evil. Religion (which must here be understood as no worship of cult or creed, but as embodying a belief in, and reverence for, some omnipotent power which is good and kind) was given the Jupiterian in order that he might be influenced by all the benefits which religion can bestow. Refining, broadening, uplifting influences are given the Jupiterian, so that the natural leader, created under the plan of the seven types, is a good, well-meaning commander. Religion, therefore, is one of his strongest attributes. The Jupiterian is fond of show and ceremony, and in his methods of worship, his system of government, or in whatever sphere he may operate, he will like pageantry and observance of form. He is a believer in and an upholder of law and order; loves and encourages peace; his preference and struggle is not for martial supremacy, but that the populace may clamor for him. He is aristocratic and conservative, believes in ancient lineage and the manifest destiny which has called him to his particular sphere of activity. He is honest, and in all things despises cheating and fraud, honor being one of his leading attributes. He believes in right and independence, and his counsel and support are always with the oppressed. This faculty of insisting that common people have their due makes him, despite his aristocratic tendencies, the idol of the multitude. He is not hard to get along with, is easily pleased, especially with attentions to himself, and has a faculty for keeping friends. Jupiterians are, if any type may claim this distinction, lucky, for they have so many desirable and attractive qualities that they are pushed forward by their friends into successful careers, because they are general favorites. There is another factor in their composition that enables them to rise over every obstacle. They are ambitious; and with this tremendous force behind them, urging on the strong qualities they possess, the Jupiterian is one of the most invincible of all the types. Ambition is powerful as a moving force in human success, and the Jupiterian is the embodiment of ambition. He has pride as well, for no man could possess his aristocratic, dignified, ambitious qualities without also having pride in himself and his achievements. This pride is but natural; it is not a fault, and for its possession he should not be blamed. To recapitulate =  leadership, ambition, religion, honor, pride, dignity, and an intense love of nature are his predominant characteristics, and these, strengthened by the many accessories carried in their train, should come to your mind when you see him. In his marriage relations the Jupiterian is very ambitious. He matures early in life, and marries when young one of whom he believes he can feel proud. His ambitious desire to have the helpmate shine before the world is not always realized, for a Jupiterian, as well as any other person, may be deceived, so is often unhappily wedded. He is predisposed to marry, and, knowing this, you will not need as strong confirmations of marriage with this type as are needed with some of the other types. In health matters the Jupiterian is predisposed to certain disorders. He is a great eater, and in this regard is somewhat of a sensualist. He eats highly seasoned, strong food, is fond of wine, and is addicted to smoking. He is a high liver and his danger is from being an over-eater. Thus he injures his digestion, has vertigo, or fainting fits, as his first warning, and these attacks increase in violence until apoplexy ends the story. He has gout and stomach trouble, and these produce impure blood which often affects his lungs, making them weak. Disordered stomach, indigestion, vertigo, apoplexy, gout, and sometimes lung trouble are his peculiar health dangers. In this description I have used the pronoun he, and considered the Jupiterian as a masculine type. There are, however, just as many feminine Jupiterians. On recognizing a strong Mount and finger in a woman, leadership, ambition, pride, honor, and all the Jupiterian attributes belong to her. I have used the masculine pronoun with all the Mounts only as a matter of convenience and brevity. With this idea of the Jupiterian character and attributes, it remains to find how they are distributed, and how they will probably be expended. On recognizing strong Jupiterian traits, locate the apex of the Mount. If it is distinctly in the centre of the Mount, the qualities will be evenly distributed. If leaning over toward Saturn, the sobriety, sadness, and wisdom of that Mount will hold down the Jupiterian ambition and make it safer, for Jupiter will be guided by Saturn. If the apex leans or is marked on the outer edge of the hand opposite Saturn, the Jupiterian qualities will be directed to seeking purely selfish, personal advancement. If the apex lies near the Heart line, the ambition and pride will be for those loved, and if near the line of Head, the ambition will be for intellectual success. The Mount Of Jupiter. Part 3 Note the consistency of the hand, to see if energy will back the ambition, or whether soft or flabby qualities will cause the ambition to be only unfulfilled desire. Examine the texture of the skin to see if the Jupiterian qualities are refined or coarse. Take flexibility into account, to see whether an elastic mind is to help carry the Jupiterian ambition forward, or a hard, unyielding mind, as shown by a stiff hand, is to hamper them. In estimating the outcome of life for a subject, it makes all the difference in the world what strong characteristics, such as the Jupiterian possesses, have behind them, and whether there is coarseness or refinement, a clear or a dense mind. Naturally more would be expected from a fine combination than from a coarse; you will have refined, high-minded leadership in one case, common, selfish ambition in the other. Look carefully at the color of the palm, nails, and lines, for weakness, strength, or disease indicated at these points. With white color and its accompanying coldness, the Jupiterian will be selfish, less attractive to others, less magnetic. He will lose much of his Jupiterian power to attract men and lead them. He will have ambition and desire for power, but will be repellent to his fellows, who will not so readily follow, applaud, and elevate him to positions of command. With white color you cannot predict any such degree of success as with the next grade, pink. Here is the normal flow of the life-renewing current, producing normal conditions of health and temperament. The subject is bright, active, vivacious, attractive - and all of his powers are brought out, making him the magnetic and successful Jupiterian. He is admired by his enemies, loved by his friends, and is the idol of the masses. Red color indicates excessive strength and ardor. To add intensity to an already strong character can easily make it too strong. All the dangers to health are increased. He is an over-eater, has dyspepsia, and tends strongly, on account of the amount of blood rushed to the brain by a strong heart, to have apoplexy. This type of the Jupiterian is the apoplectic subject. In character he is too pronounced, and inclines to the excess of a commanding disposition, which is tyranny or despotism. He becomes the ruler to whom men are attracted not by common sympathy but because he is stronger than they. When a pink-colored type of Jupiterian appears, the crowd flock to him and desert the red-colored type, whose influence becomes more uncertain in that he rules by fear, not love. Red color is too strong; it leads to excess of the type. Yellow color is not often found, for the Jupiterian is seldom troubled by liver disturbance. You may find a combination of Jupiterian and Saturnian or Mercurian, and in that case, yellow color will be found. This will apply to the Saturnian or Mercurian side of the combination, not to the Jupiterian. Blue color is sometimes found, for the excessive action of the heart may weaken that organ and cause some congestion. This is not so often found, and is not a health danger of the Jupiterian that is permanent or typical. In examining the nails of the Jupiterian, remember what traits they may emphasize or weaken. He is naturally a healthy type, so it is not to be expected that bad-health nails will often be found. But disease sometimes creeps into this type, so be on the lookout for anything that may show it. Nervous or fluted nails will be recognized by texture, shape, or brittleness, and nervousness in the degree the nails indicate must be applied to him. Bilious nails are seldom found; the broad nails of robust constitution are oftenest seen. Temperament and character will be indicated by either the short, critical nail, or the nails of honesty and openness. If the nail be very short, the Jupiterian desire to lead will be more intense and aggressive, and these qualities will be likely to show excess in strength. The open, honest nail will be the best, and adds to this type all of their good qualities. Expect hair on the hands, for the Jupiterian has a strong constitution, and hair shows strength. It should be carefully noted what color it is, and also whether coarse or fine, for these will tell us how the Jupiterian characteristics will be manifested. With light hair this subject is less ardent, less liable to suffer from diseases peculiar to the type, because less sensual; he is more phlegmatic, colder, and not so likely to attract, but he is not lazy, and is very practical, strong, and determined in the pursuit of his ambitions. Black hair adds sparkle, fire, vigor, and ardor, but shows a liability to Oriental sensualism and love of ease. This will incline the subject to be a greater eater, and thus more likely to injure his health. The hand, as a whole, will tell you of the plane on which he will operate. If the mental world is most pronounced, his ambition will be for distinction in a literary career. He will be the author who writes of great leaders, politicians, and generals. His trend is toward mental work, but he shows the Jupiterian love of rule and leadership even in the choice of subjects for his writings. If the middle world of the hand is most prominent, he will lead in business and affairs of the commercial world. If the lower third of his hand be most prominent, an already sensual person, from his natural type qualities, will become more so, and bad results will follow. The best combination is of the two upper worlds. Next come the two lower, for in this case he will have the common-sense middle world to hold the lower in check. Take out the middle and leave the two others and a sensual dreamer will be left. The same rules apply to individual fingers, especially the finger of Jupiter. Note whether the mental, the abstract, or material world predominates, by noting which phalanx of the finger is longest, if a long finger of Jupiter is seen, and also notice which is shortest with a short finger. The Mount Of Jupiter. Part 4 In this way you can tell which world is in excess or deficient, or whether, with a long finger, the worlds are all long, but equally developed. If the finger reaches to the middle of the first phalanx of Saturn, the Jupilerian desire for leadership will not be excessive. If the finger is as long as Saturn, the desire for power will be great, and if longer than Saturn, the subject will be an absolute tyrant. If shorter than the first joint of Saturn (95), it will show that the subject is not a pure Jupi-terian, even though he may have a strong Mount, for there will be lack of ability to lead, and that does not belong to this type. In this case, ambition, religion, and honor may remain, but the full strength of Jupiterian ability is not present. A crooked finger of Jupiter adds shrewdness to the Jupiterian qualities, and is not necessarily a bad sign, though it strengthens the Mount very much. It shows that the subject will systematically plan all his moves, and will lead other men, always knowing how he manages to do it. This curved finger may be combined with a bad Mercurian type, be bilious, and evil, in which case it will make a bad and dishonest subject, but by itself this bent finger which you will often meet only adds shrewdness to Jupiterian qualities. In studying the finger by separate phalanges, the tips must be taken into full consideration. If the first phalanx, indicating mental strength, be long, it will show that the mental world rules, and intuition and religion will be strong. If the tips be conic it will show that idealistic, intuitive qualities are added to the mental. The Jupiterian being naturally religious, this long first phalanx with conic tip will prove that the subject is so. He will have great reverence and idealism in his beliefs, his religion will be an inspiration, and he will be a strong, high-minded person. If the tip be square, he will show more common-sense, will reason and take less for granted. His religion is plainer in form of worship and more practical. If the tip be spatulate, he will more readily be an agnostic, have original views, and follow no creed or church. By carefully noting this first phalanx and tip you can tell, with a good deal of accuracy, to what church, if to any, your subject belongs. The spatulate or excessively square tip on a finger of Jupiter shows a domineering spirit which in family, business, and every walk of life will make the tyrant and the despot. The broader the first phalanx, the more domineering the subject, and the less religious. The second phalanx shows the business side of the Jupiterian. This phalanx will tell of ambition, the great driving force that makes Jupiter-ians lead, and even makes weak natures advance. A long second phalanx, standing for ambition, shows that practical affairs will have much attention, for the subject will want to lead in money-making ways. Here again tips must be consulted. Conic tips will add conic qualities, square tips with this second phalanx strong are the best business indications, spatulate lips will show an active, ambitious, original subject who is sure to force his way in the world, especially on practical lines. JUPITER DEVELOPMENT DEFICIENT No. 95. JUPITER DEVELOPMENT DEFICIENT. The third phalanx of this finger is most important. Note whether it is merely long and not thick, whether it is long and also thick, or long and waist-like=  or whether short with any of these combinations. When long but not thick, this phalanx shows that the lower world is normal, and lends the support it should to the upper phalanges. If this phalanx should have excessive length over the other two, it would show that the Jupiterian ambitions and desire to rule are sordid and they will operate in a manner not always the most refined. The third phalanx, being the baser world, will be leading, while the aspirations and qualities of the upper phalanges will be only following. With this development there will be a coarsening of the whole nature; but as the phalanx is not thick, the Jupiterian sensualism will not be present, and it will indicate only a common way of exercising the Jupiterian qualities. If the phalanx be long and also thick (96), it shows that Jupiterian gluttony is to be added. Thus we will find the subject, if this long and thick phalanx is the most prominent, ruled by the common, sensual side, and the Jupiterian ambitions and desires will be coarsened and made very pronounced. The subject will certainly be a voracious eater, and this will bring on the health troubles peculiar to the Jupiterian in a marked degree. Apoplexy and the sudden end of life will be almost certain. No place so fully shows gluttony as the long, thick third phalanx of Jupiter. It is a menace to health, ambition, and success, for the mind will be more attracted to eating than to anything else. This subject has a desire to rule, not from high ambitions and motives, but rather that he may never fail in his food supply. All his efforts are directed by such motives. In the three phalanges of the finger of Jupiter we have gone from intuition and religion (first phalanx conic and long), to gluttony (long, thick third phalanx), and between these are healthy business desires and ambitions (second phalanx). By separating the phalanges in this way it is possible to determine the kind of motives and ambitions that will guide and rule the subject. There is also the long third phalanx which, instead of being thick, is waist-like (97). Here has entirely disappeared the Jupiterian gluttony, and no matter how strong the finger may be, the subject will contend for higher ideals, not baser gratifications. In this case the Jupiterian health difficulties will not appear. His troubles will come from nervousness, or from throat and lungs. If this waist-like third phalanx shows by its flabbiness that it was thick, but has shrivelled, your subject has been an over-eater, has ruined his stomach and become a dyspeptic, suffering from stomach disorders of various kinds. Short phalanges show that the qualities belonging to the particular phalanx which is short are deficient. THICK THIRD PHALANX OF JUPITER FINGER No. 96. THICK THIRD PHALANX OF JUPITER FINGER. WAIST LIKE THIRD PHALANX OF JUPITER FINGER No. 97. WAIST-LIKE THIRD PHALANX OF JUPITER FINGER. The Mount Of Jupiter. Part 5 In examining a long finger of Jupiter, see if each phalanx is normal, or whether the length comes from excess in a single phalanx, or from two excessive phalanges and one short one. Remember where the tip of the normal-length finger should reach, then note which phalanx is deficient and which excessive. In reading this hand the excessive phalanges show the worlds in which Jupiteiian qualities would operate, and you can tell whether the subject wishes to lead in intellectual matters, business, or pleasures, and also which of these are absent by the deficient phalanx. Intuition and religion with the first phalanx, ambition and business with the second, desire to rule and gluttony with the third. If, with the thick third phalanx, you find great redness, gluttony will be still further fired by ardor and strength of blood current, and apoplexy with this subject is doubly certain. Apply color to each phalanx. White will make religion cold, business and ambitions cold, and decrease the ardor and danger of the thick third phalanx. Apply color qualities to the qualities of each phalanx as they are found in a greater or less degree, and it will further help in the reading. This ability to separate and read each phalanx will give a complete mastery of the types, for it will enable you to tell which side of them will dominate. Knotty fingers will add knotty qualities to a Jupiterian, and he will be an analyst and reasoner. If only the first knot is developed he will have mental order and system in carrying out his plans. If the second knot is developed he will have order and system in his business affairs and be neat in his personal appearance. With smooth fingers, impulse, inspiration, and artistic ideas will guide him. He will act on first impressions rather than by the slower, analytical methods of thought. With long fingers, he will go into minutiae, and in planning his Jupiterian campaigns, no details will be omitted. He will be suspicious and distrustful even of his own supporters, will be neat in appearance, and have all the other long-fingered qualities. Finding a Jupiterian has short fingers, you will know that he is quick in thought and action, impulsive, will dislike minutiae, and will plan the campaigns, but leave the carrying out of details to friends and supporters. Apply short-fingered qualities to the Jupiterian as a type, then to whichever world the Jupiterian qualities will operate in, judged from individual phalanges; in this way you can tell whether mental quickness, business, or common instincts will rule the short fingers. The supreme test is made by the thumb. Are strong determination and reason back of Jupiterian desires and ambitions? Analyze the thumb, see what kind of will is present, as shown by the shape of the will phalanx, - whether clubbed, spatulate, square, conic, paddle-shaped, broad, or refined. Then see how much will there is by the length of the will phalanx. See if reason and logic are strong by length of the second phalanx, see what kind of reason by the shape of this phalanx, then see if will is stronger than reason, evenly balanced with it, or deficient. From these examinations you can tell whether good sense and determination will make the Jupiterian ambitions succeed or whether lack of these qualities will ruin them. No matter what the ambitions, there must be will and reason to bring them to anything. No matter how strong the Jupiterian, he must have a good thumb to make him what he was built to be, a commander and leader. Now by discovering the type of the subject, you know what sphere in life he was created to fill. You can picture what the pure type looks like. His characteristics, his health difficulties and dangers, his faults and virtues, have been shown; whether he is refined or coarse (texture), has an elastic or stiff mind (flexibility), energy or laziness (consistency), is cold, warm, bilious, or congested (color), is nervous, has heart disease, consumption, bronchitis, is robust or weak, honest, cranky, or critical (nails), is full of vital energy (hair), lives in the mental, abstract, or material worlds (hand as a whole) what side his peculiar type qualities will take (phalanges of finger), whether artistic, practical, active, or original ideas will govern (tips), whether reason and analysis will rule (knotty fingers), whether inspiration will guide him (smooth fingers), whether minutiae and detail, or quick thought and action and generalities, will be his modes of procedure (long and short fingers), and whether will and reason will push all these qualities to a successful conclusion (thumb). Intelligent application of this information will enable you to read a subject accurately and thoroughly. Unfortunately, we cannot have all good Jupiterians, but find the bad type so often that it must be fully considered. In this bad type the appearance is changed, the life, beauty, and strength diminished, and in place there is an undersized man, not commanding in appearance, eyes in which kindliness is lacking, a bad skin without the healthy glow of the good type, straight, stiff hair, a poorly shaped nose, mouth very large, full and sensual, with long, dark teeth. This Jupiterian is forbidding and unattractive, and no crowd follows in his steps. The bad type has all the Jupiterian love of command, but no power of enforcing it except upon those weak and unable to resist him. He is the tyrant and despot at heart, but frequently finds only his family upon whom to exercise these qualities. Thus in his home he is a person of overbearing pettiness. He is grossly extravagant, but in spending his money he furthers only his own pleasure and gratifies only his own appetite. He is a sensualist, selfish in the extreme, and a debauchee. His family are subjected to indignities and forced to submit to a tyrannical will. The Mount Of Jupiter. Part 6 With no one to rule but these helpless victims whom he should cherish, he forces them to feel his rough Jupiterian despotism and sensualism, producing misery and unhappiness for them. 

He is unsuccessful in life and miserable, for desire to rule is always thwarted, and realizing this ill-success, he turns to debauchery and makes life a burden to himself and to his family. Weak as he is, mean as he is, the Jupiterian desire for power and rule is in him, but instead of making him successful in the world he is only a producer of woe. The bad type is shown by a full red Mount of Jupiter, deep red lines, a very crooked finger of Jupiter, excessively thick in the third phalanx, coarse skin, a stiff hand, short nails, large thumb with thick will phalanx, and short thick second phalanx. The best hand for a good Jupiterian is large with smooth fingers and square tips, broad, pink nails, square or rounding on the end, the finger of Jupiter conic and large, with the phalanges equally developed, a good Mount of Venus and Mercury, elastic consistency, normal flexibility, a large thumb with long, broad, or paddle-shaped will phalanx, and long waist-like second phalanx. Nearly all Jupiterian hands will be thick in the third phalanges, and have deep Head and Life lines, with color very pink or red. There is no trouble in recognizing the good and bad types here described, if found in the pure state, but as other types blend with the Jupiterian, the hands will not show these unmixed Jupiterian qualities, and you may not' feel sure to what type the subject belongs. Follow the directions of Chapter XVIII (Mounts And Fingers - How To Judge Them). in locating the Mounts and you will have no trouble in finding the predominating Mount, as well as the second in strength. From these the combination of types to which the subject belongs can be determined. If the Mount of Jupiter is strongest and Venus next, he will be a Jupiterian-Venusian and all the Jupiterian ambition, desires, and qualities will be present, as well as love, sympathy, and the long train of Venusian attributes. Always consider the qualities of the leading type as predominant, to which add those of the secondary Mounts. Note in the secondary Mounts, by the phalanges of the finger, which world rules, as either the mental strength, business qualities, or the baser elements of the secondary type will be the ones which will support the leading type. Thus with a Jupiterian-Mercurian, the finger of Mercury having the second phalanx longest, the Jupiterian, which is the leading type, will be supported and helped by the scientific qualities of the Mercurian, this being the indication of the second phalanx of Mercury. If the first phalanx of Mercury, in the above combination, is the longest instead of the second, it will be the Mercurian powers of oratory and eloquence that will help the Jupiterian. This is a great assistance to one who wishes to influence others. By locating the leading and the attendant Mounts, and by noting which phalanx of the fingers lead, as I have done in the above instances, there is no hand to be found in which you cannot distinguish the leading type, the attendant types, and determine also what quality of the leading one is predominant, as well as what side of the attendant Mounts will help forward the combination. This is the way to decide upon occupations. It is absolutely accurate in determining what is the best vocation in life for a client. The Jupiterian seldom commits suicide. When he does it is the result of disappointed ambition or wounded vanity. As a general rule, when he reaches the stage of discouragement that is supposed to cause men to take life, the Jupiterian takes to drink and drowns his sorrows in the" flowing bowl." Jupiterians who commit suicide have short fingers and act upon impulse. Thus in a sudden disappointment they may on the spur of the moment jump from a high place or use a revolver. Long-fingered or knotty-fingered Jupiterians do not take their own lives. Give a Jupiterian time to think it out and he will never do so. The drink habit is a danger which all Jupiterians have to encounter, and this is especially a danger if the color of the hands, lines, and nails be red. These high-spirited subjects find a great temptation to indulge their appetite for stimulants. If the Life line shows great vigor of constitution by its depth and color this is a positive menace to a Jupiterian.