---
title: "The Philippines"
date: 2022-04-30
image: /covers/travels.jpg
description: ""
linkTitle: "Chapter 14"
linkb: "/research/jagor/ph"
linkbtext: "Index"
linkf: "/research/jagor/ph"
linkftext: "Index"
author: Juan
icon: /icons/spmat.png
---


The frame and body of bamboo; the collar and noseband of the buffalo, of chair-cane ; and the

roof of pandanus-leaves.

## MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE BÍCOL INDIANS.

On my second journey in Camarines, which I undertook in February, I went by water from Polangui, past Bátu, as far as Nága. The Quináli, which runs into the south-eastern corner of the lake of Bátu, runs out again on the north side as the Bícol River, and flows in a north-westerly direction as far as the Bay of San Miguél. It forms the medium of a not inconsiderable trade between Albay and Camarines, particularly in rice; of which the supply grown in the former province does not suffice for the population, which consumes the superfluity of Camarines. The rice is conveyed in large boats up the river as far as Quináli, and thence trans. ported further on in buffalo carts; and the boats return empty. During the dry season of the year, the breadth of the very tortuous Bícol, at its mouth, is a little over sixty feet, and increases but very gradually. There is considerable variety of vegetation upon its banks, and in animal life it is highly attractive. I was particularly struck with its numerous monkeys and water-fowl. Of the latter the Plotus variety was most abundant, but difficult to shoot. They sit motionless on the trees on the bank, only their thin heads and necks, like those of tree-snakes, overtopping the leaves. On the approach of the boat they precipitate themselves hastily into the water; and it is not until after many minutes that the thin neck is seen rising up again at some distance from the spot where the bird disappeared. The Plotus appears to be as rapid on the wing as it is in swimming and diving.

In Nága, the chief city of South Camarines, I alighted at the tribunal, from which, however, I was immediately invited by the principal official of the district—who is famed for his hospitality far beyond the limits of his province—to his house, where I was loaded with civilities and favours. This universally beloved gentleman put everybody under contribution in order to enrich my collections, and did all in his power to render my stay agreeable and to further my designs.

Nága is the seat of a bishopric and of the provincial Government. In official documents it is called Nueva-Cáceres, in honour of the Captain-General, D. Fr. de Sande, a native of Cáceres, who about 1578 founded Nága (the Spanish town) close to the Indian village. At the beginning of the seventeenth century it numbered nearly one hundred Spanish inhabitants; at the present time it hardly boasts a dozen. Murillo Velarde remarks (xiii. 272), in contrast to the state of things in America, that of all the towns founded in the Philippines, with the exception of Manila, only the skeletons, the names without the substance, have been preserved. The reason is, as has been frequently shown, that up to the present time plantations, and consequently proper settlers, have been wanting. Formerly Nága was the principal town of the whole of that district of Luzon lying to the east of Tayabas, which, on account of the increased population, was divided into the three provinces of North and South Camarines and Albáy. The boundaries of these governmental districts, those between Albáy and South Camarines more especially, have been drawn very arbitrarily; although, the whole of the territory, as is shown by the map,

 [blocks in formation]
geographically is very well defined. The country is named Camarínes ; but it might more suitably be called the country of the Bicols, for the whole of it is inhabited by one race, the Bicol Indians, who are distinguished by their speech and many other peculiarities from their neighbours, the Tagals on the west, and the Bisayans on the islands to the south and east. The. Bicols are found only in this district and in a few islands lying immediately in front of it. Of their coming hither no information is to be obtained from the comprehensive but confused histories of the Spanish monks. Morga considers them to be natives of the island; on the other hand, it is asserted by tradition that the inhabitants of Manila and its vicinity are descended from Malays who have migrated thither, and from the inhabitants of other islands and more distant provinces.* Their speech is midway between that of the Tagals and the Bisayans, and they themselves appear, in both their manners and customs, to be a half.. breed between these two races. Physically and mentally they are inferior to the Tagals, and superior to the inhabitants of the eastern Bisayan islands. Bicol is spoken only in the two Camarínes, Albáy, Luzon, the islands of Masbáte, Burias, Ticáo, and Catanduanes, and in the smaller adjoining islands. The inhabitants of the volcanic mountain Ysaróg and its immediatè neighbourhood speak it in the greatest purity. Thence towards the west the Bicol dialect becomes more and more like the Tagal, and towards the east like the Bisay, until by degrees, even before reaching the boundaries of their ethnographical districts, it merges into these two kindred languages.

In South Camarines the sowing of the rice in beds begins in June or July, always at the commencement of the rainy season ; but, in fields artificially watered, earlier, because thus the fruit ripens

* Arenas thinks that the ancient annals of the Chinese probably contain information relative to the settlement of the present inhabi:ants of Manila, is that people had early intercourse with the Archipelago.

at a time when, the store in the country being small, its price is high. Although the rice fields could very well give two crops

Fig. 2

Fig.1

Arado, the Plough, Differs very little from that still used in Spain. With the exception of d and e, all is of wood, even the nails : a, tokod, Om. 71 ; b, timon, Om. 21 ; c, caballo, im. 67; d, lipia, in length Orn. 21, in breadth, above, Om. 16, below, Om. 11 ; e, sodsod, Om. 21 in length, and Om. 16 in breadth; 9, pakanap, Om. 71;-cane connecting d with a, and g with a and c.

yearly, they are tilled only once. It is planted out in August, with intervals of a hand's-breadth between each row and each individual plant; and within four months the rice is ripe. The fields are

[merged small][merged small][merged small][merged small][merged small][ocr errors]
Fig.4 Agricultural implements of the Bicol Indians. Figs. 1 and 2, Soród (harrow) : @, tampong, of bamboo, Om. 52; b, badas, of Caryota, Om. 68 ; C, papan, of the very hard wood of Camagon, Om, 73 long, and Om. 12 thick ; d, tagiak, of knotted branches for pulling in the buffalo; e, nipon (tooth, of Caryota, Om. 31 ; f, bands of cane. Figs. 3 and 4, Azadón (hatchet). Figs. 5 and 6, Kag-kag (rake); entirely of bamboo; length of teeth, Om. 16.

never manured, and but seldom ploughed; the weeds and the stubble being generally trodden into the already soaked ground RICE CULTIVATION.

147

by a dozen buffaloes, and the soil afterwards simply rolled with a cylinder furnished with sharp points, or loosened with the harrow (soród). Besides the agricultural implements named above, there are the Spanish hatchet (azadón) and a rake of bamboo (kag-kag) in use. The harvest is effected in a peculiar manner. The rice which is soonest ripe is cut for ten per cent., that is, the labourer receives for his toil the tenth bundle for himself. At this time of year rice is very scarce, want is imminent, and labour reasonable. The more fields, however, that ripen, the higher become the reapers' wages, rising to twenty, thirty, forty, even to fifty per cent. ; indeed, the Executive sometimes consider it to be necessary to force the people to the harvest by corporal punishment and imprisonment, in order to prevent a large portion of the crop from rotting on the stalk. Nevertheless, in very fruitful years a part of the harvest is lost. The rice is cut halm by halm (as in

Rice Knife. Java) with a peculiarly formed knife, or, failing such, with the sharp-edged flap of a mussel* found in the ditches of the rice-fields, which one has only to stoop to pick up.

A quiñon of the best rice land is worth from sixty to one hundred dollars (eight to thirteen thalers per acre). Rice fields on rising grounds are dearest, as they are not exposed to devastating floods as are those in the plain, and may be treated so as to insure the ripening of the fruit at the time when the highest price is to be obtained

A ganta of rice is sufficient to plant four topones (1 topon=1 loan); from which 100 manojos (bundles) are gathered, each of which * Probably the Anodonta Purpurea, according to V. Martens.

[graphic]
yields half a ganta of rice. The old ganta of Nága, however, being equal to a modern ganta and a half, the produce may be calculated at 75 cabanes per quiñon, about 93 bushels per acre.* In books 250 cabanes are usually stated to be the average produce of a quiñon : but that is an exaggeration. The fertility of the fields certainly varies very much; but, when it is considered that the land in the Philippines is never manured, but depends, for the maintenance of its vitality, exclusively upon the overflowing of the mud wbich is washed down from the mountains, it may be believed that the first numbers better express the true average. In Java the harvest, in many provinces, amounts to only 50 cabanes per quiñon ; in some, indeed, to three times this amount; and in China, with the most careful culture and abundant manure, to 180 cabanes. † Besides rice, they cultivate the camote (sweet potatoe, Convolvulus batatas). This flourishes like a weed ; indeed, it is sometimes planted for the purpose of eradicating the weeds from soil intended for coffee or-cacao. It spreads out into a thick carpet, and is an inexhaustible storehouse to its owner, who, the whole year through, can supply his wants from his field. Gabi (Caladium), Ubi (Dioscorea), maize, and other kinds of grain, are likewise cultivated.

After the rice harvest the buffaloes, horses, and bullocks, are allowed to graze on the fields. During the rice culture they remain in the gogonales—cane-fields which arise in places once cultivated for mountain-rice and afterwards abandoned. [Gogo is the name of a cane 7 to 8 feet high, Saccharum sp.). Transport then is almost impossible, because during the rainy season the roads are impassable, and the cattle find nothing to eat. The Indian does not feed his beast, but allows it to perish from hunger when it cannot support itself. In the wet season of the

* 1 ganta = 3 litres. 1 quiñon = 100 loànes = 2.79495 hectares = 6.89 acres. 1 cabán = 25 gantas.

† Scherzer, “ Miscellaneous Information."

 [blocks in formation]
year it frequently happens that a buffalo falls down from starvation whilst drawing a cart. A buffalo costs from 7 to 10 dollars ; a horse 10 to 20; and a cow 6 to 8. Very fine horses are valued at from 30 to 50 dollars, and occasionally as much as 80 dollars'; but the native horses are not esteemed at Manila, because they have no stamina. The bad water, the bad hay, and the great heat of the place at once point out the reason ; otherwise it would be profitable to export horses in favourable seasons to Manila, where they would fetch twice their value. According to Morga, there were neither horses nor asses on the island until the Spaniards imported them from China and New Spain.* They were at first small and vicious. Horses were imported also from Japan, “not swift but powerful, with large heads and thick manes, looking like Friesland horses ; ” † and the breed improved rapidly. Those born in the country, mostly cross-breeds, drive well. Black cattle are generally in the hands of a few individuals; some of whom in Camarines possess as many as 3,000 head; but they are hardly saleable in the province, although they have been exported profitably for some years past to Manila. The black cattle of the province are small but nutritious. They are never employed for labour, and the cows are not milked. The Indians, who generally feed on fish, crabs, mussels, and wild herbs instead of rice, prefer the flesh of the buffalo to that of the ox: but they eat it only on feast-days.

The old race of sheep, imported by the Spaniards previous to this century, still flourishes and is easily propagated. Those occasionally brought from Shanghai and Australia are considered to

* More than one hundred years later, Father Taillandier writes :-“ The Spaniards have brought cows, horses, and sheep from America ; but these animals cannot live there on account of the dampness and inundations."- Letters from Father Taillandier to Father Willard.]

† At the present time the Chinese horses are plump, large-headed, hairy, and with bushy tails and manes; and the Japanese, elegant and enduring, similar to the Arabian. Good Manila horses are of the latter type, and are much prized by the Europeans in Chinese sea-port towns.

be deficient in endurance, unfruitful, and generally short-lived. Mutton is procurable every day in Manila ; in the interior, however, at least in the eastern provinces, very rarely ; although the rearing of sheep might there be carried on without difficulty, and in many places most profitably ; the people being too idle to take care of the young lambs, which they complain are torn to pieces by the dogs when they wander about free. The sheep appear to have been acclimatized with difficulty. Morga says that they were brought several times from New Spain, but did not multiply; so that in his time this kind of domestic animal did not exist. Pork is eaten by wealthy Europeans only when the hog has been brought up from the litter at home. In order to prevent its wandering away, it is usually enclosed in a widemeshed, cylindrical hamper of bamboo, upon filling which it is slaughtered. The native hogs are too nauseous for food, the animals maintaining themselves almost entirely on human excrement.

Crawford observes that the names of all the domestic animals in the Philippines belong to foreign languages. Those of the dog, swine, goat, buffalo, cat, even of the fowl and the duck, are Malay or Javanese ; while those of the horse, ox, and sheep, are Spanish, Until these animals were first imported from Malay, the aborigines were less fortunate in this respect than the Americans, who at least had the alpaca, llama, and vicuña. The names likewise of most of the cultivated plants, such as rice, yams, sugar-cane, cacao and indigo, are Malay, as well as those for silver, copper, and tin. Of the words relating to commerce, one-third is Malay ; to which belong most of the terms used in trades, as well as the denominations for weights and measures, for the calendarso far as it exists,—and for numbers, besides the words for writing, reading, speaking, and narrative. On the other hand, only a small number of terms which refer to war are borrowed from the Malay:

 [blocks in formation]
Referring to the degree of civilisation which the Philippines possessed previous to their intercourse with the Malays, Crawford concludes from the purely domestic words that they cultivated no corn, their vegetable food consisting of batata (?) and banana. They had not a single domestic animal; they were acquainted with iron and gold, but with no other metal, and were clothed in stuffs of cotton and alpaca, woven by themselves. They had invented a peculiar phonetic alphabet; and their religion consisted in the belief in good and evil spirits and witches, in circumcision, and in somewhat of divination by the stars. They therefore were superior to the inhabitants of the South Sea, inasmuch as they possessed gold, iron, and woven fabrics, and inferior to them in that they had neither dog, pig, nor fowl.

Assuming the truth of the above sketch of pre-Christian culture, which has been put together only with the help of defective linguistic sources, and comparing it with the present, we find, as the result, a considerable progress, for which the Philippines are indebted to the Spaniards. The influence of social relations has been already exhibited in the text. The Spaniards have imported the horse, the bullock, and the sheep ; maize, coffee, sugar-cane, cacao, sesame, tobacco, indigo, many fruits, and probably the batata, which they met with in Mexico under the name of camotli. * From this circumstance the term camote, universal in the Philippines, appears to have had its origin,—Crawford, indeed, erroneously considering it a native term. (According to a communication from Dr. Witmack, the opinion has lately been - conceived that the batata is indigenous not only to America, but also to the East Indies, as it has two names in Sanscrit, sharkarakanda and ruktaloo.)

With the exception of embroidery, the natives have made but little progress in industries, in the weaving and the plaiting

* Compare Hernandez, “ Opera Omnia”; Torquemada, “ Monarchia Indica."

of mats; and the handicrafts are entirely carried on by the Chinese.

The exports consist of rice and abaca. The province exports about twice as much rice as it consumes; a large quantity to Albáy, which, less adapted for the cultivation of rice, produces only abaca ; and a fair share to North Camarínes, wbich is very mountainous, and little fertile. The rice can hardly be shipped to Manila, as there is no high road to the south side of the province, near to the principal town, and the transport by water from the north side, and from the whole of the eastern portion of Luzon, would immoderately enhance the price of the product. The imports are confined to the little that is imported by Chinese traders.

The traders are almost all Chinese, who alone possess shops in which clothing materials and woollen stuffs, partly of native and partly of European manufacture, women's embroidered slippers, and counterfeit jewellery, may be obtained. The whole amount of capital invested in these shops certainly does not exceed 200,000 dollars. In the remaining pueblos of Camarines there are no Chinese merchants; and the inhabitants are consequently obliged to get their supplies from Nága.

The land belongs to the State, but is let to any one who will build upon it. The usufruct passes to the children, and ceases only when the land remains unemployed for two whole years ; after which it is competent for the Executive to dispose of it to another person.

Every family possesses its own house; and the young husband generally builds with the assistance of his friends. In many places it does not cost more than four or five dollars, as he can, if necessary, build it himself free of expense, with the simple aid of the wood knife (bolo), and of the materials to his hand, bamboo, Spanish cane, and palm-leaves. These houses, which are always built on piles on account of the humidity of the soil, often consist of a single shed, which serves for all the uses of a dwell

 [blocks in formation]
ing, and are the cause of great laxity and of foul habits, the whole family sleeping therein in common, and every passenger being a welcome guest. A fine house of boards for the family of a Cabeza perhaps costs nearly 100 dollars; and the possessions of such a family in stock, furniture, ornaments, &c. (of which they are obliged to furnish an annual inventory), would range in value between 100 and 1,000 dollars. Some reach even as much as 10,000, while the richest family of the whole province is assessed at 40,000 dollars.

In general it may be said that every pueblo supplies its own necessaries, and produces little more. To the indolent Indian, especially to him of the eastern provinces, the village in which he was born is the world ; and he leaves it only under the most pressing circumstances. Were it otherwise even, the strictness of the poll-tax would place great obstacles in the way of gratifying the desire for travel, generated by that oppressive impost.

The Indian eats three times a day—about 7 A.M., 12, and at 7 or 8 in the evening. Those engaged in severe labour consume at each meal a chupa of rice; the common people, half a chupa at breakfast, one at mid-day, and half again in the evening, altogether two chupas. Each family reaps its own supply of rice, and preserves it in barns, or buys it winnowed at the market; in the latter case purchasing only the quantity for one day or for the individual meals. The average retail price is 3 cuartos for 2 chupas (14 chupas del Rey for 1 real). To free it from the husk, the quantity for each single meal is rubbed in a mortar by the women. This is in accordance with ancient custom ; but it is also due to the fear lest, otherwise, the store should be too quickly consumed. The rice, however, is but half cooked ; and it would seem that this occurs in all places where it constitutes an essential part of the sustenance of the people, as may be seen, indeed, in Spain and Italy. Salt and much Spanish pepper (capsicum) are eaten as condiments; the latter, originally im

ported from America, growing all round the houses. To the common cooking-salt the natives prefer a so-called rock-salt, which they obtain by evaporation from sea-water previously filtered through ashes; and of which one chinanta (12lbs. German) costs about 2 reals. The consumption of salt is extremely small.

The luxuries of the Indians are buyo * and cigars—a cigar costing 1 cuarto, and a buyo much less. Cigars are rarely smoked, but are cut up into pieces, and chewed with the buyo. The women also chew buyo and tobacco, but, as a rule, very moderately ; but they do not also stain their teeth black, like the Malays; and the young and pretty adorn themselves assiduously with veils made of the areca-nut tree, whose stiff and closely packed parallel fibres, when cut crosswise, form excellent toothbrushes. They bathe several times daily, and surpass the majority of Europeans in cleanliness. Every Indian, above all things, keeps a fighting-cock; even when he has nothing to eat, he finds money for cock-fighting.

The details of domestic economy may be narrated as follows:

For cooking purposes an earthen pot is used, costing between 3 and 10 cuartos; which, in cooking rice, is closed firmly with a banana-leaf, so that the steam of a very small quantity of water is sufficient. No other cooking utensils are used by the poorer classes ; but those better off have a few cast-iron pans and dishes. In the smaller houses, the hearth consists of a portable earthen pan or a flat chest, frequently of an old cigar-chest full of sand, with three stones which serve as a tripod. In the larger houses it is in the form of a bedstead, filled with sand or ashes, instead

* Buyo is the name given in the Philippines to the preparation of betel suitable for the mouth. A leaf of betel pepper (Chavica betel), of the form and size of a bean-leaf, is smeared over with a small piece of burnt lime of the size of a pea, and rolled together from both ends to the middle; when, one end of the roll being inserted into the other, a ring is formed, into which a smooth piece of areca nut of corresponding size is introduced.

DOMESTIC ECONOMY.

155

of a mattrass. The water in small households is carried and preserved in thick bamboos. In his bolo (wood-knife), moreover, every one has an universal instrument, which he carries in a wooden sheath made by himself, suspended by a cord of looselytwisted bast fibres tied round his body. This, and the ricemortar (a block of wood with a similar cavity), together with pestles and a few baskets, constitute the whole of the household furniture of a poor family ; sometimes a large snail, with a rush wick, is also to be found as a lamp. They sleep on a mat of pandanus (fan-palm, Corypha), when they possess one ; if not, on the splittings of bamboo, with which the house is floored. By the poor oil for lighting is rarely used ; but torches of resin, which last a couple of days, are bought in the market for half a cuarto.

Their clothing requirements I ascertained to be these. A woman wears a camisa de guinára (a short shift of abaca fibre), a patadíon (a gown reaching from the hip to the ancles), a cloth, and a comb. A piece of guinára, costing 1 real, gives two shifts; the coarsest patadíon costs 3 reals; a cloth, at the highest, 1 real; and a comb, 2 cuartos ; making altogether 4 reals, 12 cuartos. Women of the better class wear a camisa, costing between 1 and 2 r., a patadíon 6 r., cloth between 2 and 3 r., and a comb 2 cu. The men wear a shirt, 1 r., hose, 3 r., hat (tararura) of Spanish cane, 10 cu., or a salacot (a large rain-hat, frequently decorated), at least 2 r.—often, when ornamented with silver, as much as 50 dollars. At least three, but more commonly four, suits are worn out yearly; the women, however, taking care to weave almost the whole quantity for the family themselves.

The daily wages of the common labourer are 1 real, without food ; and his hours of work are from 6 to 12, and from 2 to 6 o'clock. The women, as a rule, perform no field labour, but plant out the rice and assist in the reaping; their wages on both occasions being equal to those of the men. Wood and stone-cutters receive 1.5 r. per day, and calkers 1.75 r.

The Tercio is a pretty general contract in the cultivation of the land. The owner simply lets arable land for the third part of the crop. Some mestizoes possess several pieces of ground; but they are seldom connected together, as they generally acquire them as mortgages for sums bearing but a small proportion to their real value.

Under the head of earnings I give the income of a small family. The man earns daily 1 r., and the woman, if she weaves coarse stuff, į r. and her food (thus a piece of guinára, occupying the labour of two days, costs half a real in weavers' wages). The most skilful female weaver of the finer stuffs obtains 12 r. per piece; but it takes a month to weave; and the month, on account of the numerous holy-days, must be calculated at the most as equal to twenty-four working days; she consequently earns į r. per day and her food. For the knitting of the fibres of the ananas for the piña web (called sugot) she gets only an eighth of a real and her food.

In all the pueblos there are schools. The schoolmaster is paid by the Government, and generally obtains two dollars per month, without board or lodging. In large pueblos the salary amounts to three dollars and a half; out of which an assistant must be paid. The schools are under the supervision of the ecclesiastics of the place. Reading and writing are taught, the writing copies being Spanish. The teacher, who has to teach his scholars Spanish exactly, does not understand it himself, while the Spanish officers, on the other hand, do not understand the language of the country; and the priests have no inclination to alter this state of things, which is very useful to them as a means of influence. Almost the only Indians who speak Spanish are those who have been in the service of Europeans. A kind of religious horn-book is the first that is read in the language of the country (Bicol); and after that comes the Christian Doctrine, the reading-book called Casayayan. On an average, half of all the children go to school,

 [blocks in formation]
generally from the seventh to the tenth year. They learn to read a little; a few even write a little : but they soon forget it again. Only those who are afterwards employed as clerks write

eremo

Some priests do not permit boys and girls to attend the same school ; and in this case they pay a second teacher, a female, a dollar a month. The Indians learn arithmetic very quickly, generally aiding themselves by the use of mussels or stones, which they pile in little heaps before them and then count through.

The women seldom marry before the fourteenth year, twelve years being the legal limit. In the church-register of Polangui I found a marriage recorded (January, 1837) between an Indian and an Indian woman having the ominous name of Hilaria Concepcion, who at the time of the performance of the marriage ceremony was, according to a note in the margin, only nine years and ten months old. Usually people live together unmarried, because they cannot pay the expenses of the ceremony. Girls who have children by Europeans esteem it quite as an honour; and still greater is it when the priest is the parent, the cura always maintaining his children, though under an assumed name. In cases of matrimonial infidelity, which not seldom occur, the guilty woman generally is cudgelled, and the seducer escapes scot-free; appeal being rarely made to the law for redress. The men are for the most part debauched. One woman induced the paramour of her husband, by great persuasion, to confess her guilt; and thereupon, with the scissors which she bad ready to her hand, she cut off the whole of her hair; and this was the only instance of revenge which had occurred during the previous year. European females, and even mestizes, never seek husbands amongst the Indians. The women generally are well treated, doing only light work, such as sewing, weaving, embroidery, and managing the household; while all the heavy labour, with the exception of the beating of the rice, falls to the men. The public maidens associate with the wives, and often get married themselves; and sometimes fathers offer their daughters to Europeans in seeking a loan ; whereupon they are taken into the house as sempstresses.

Instances of longevity are frequent amongst the Indians, particularly in Camarines. The Journal of Manila, of the 13th March, 1866, mentions an old man in Darága (Albáy) whom I knew well—Juan Jacob, born in 1744, married in 1764, and a widower in 1845. He held many public posts up to 1840, and had thirteen children, of whom five are living. He has one hundred and seventy direct descendants, and now, at one hundred and twentytwo years of age, is still vigorous, with good eyes and teeth. Extreme unction was administered to him seven times !

The first excrement of a new-born child is carefully preserved, and under the name of triaca (theriacum) is held to be a highly efficacious and universal remedy for the bites of snakes and mad dogs. It is applied to the wound externally, and at the same time is taken internally.

A large number of children die in the first two weeks after birth. Statistical data are wanting ; but, according to the opinion of one of the first physicians in Manila, at least one-fourth die. This mortality must arise from great uncleanliness and impure air; since in the chambers of the sick, and of women lying-in, the doors and windows are so closely shut that the healthy become sick from the stench and heat, and the sick recover with difficulty. Every aperture of the house is closed up by the husband early during travail, in order that Patianac may not break in-an evil spirit who brings mischief to lying-in women, and endeavours to hinder the birth. The custom has been further maintained even amongst many who attach no belief to the superstition, but who, from fear of a draught of air through a hole, have discovered a new explanation for an old custom, -namely, that

 [merged small][merged small][ocr errors]
instances of such practices occur amongst all people. One very widely-spread malady is the itch, although, according to the assurance of the physician above referred to, it may be easily subdued; and, according to the judgment of those who are not physicians and who employ that term for any eruptions of the skin, the natives generally live on much too low a diet; the Bicol Indians even more than the Tagal.* Under certain conditions, which the physicians, on being questioned, could not define more precisely, the natives can support neither hunger nor thirst; of which fact I have on many occasions been a witness. It is reported of them, when forced into such a situation as to suffer from unappeased wants, that they become critically ill; and thus they often die.

Hence arises the morbid mania for imitation, which is called in Java Sakit-latar, and here Mali-mali. In Java many believe that the sickness is only assumed, because those who pretend to be afflicted with it find it to their advantage to be seen by newly arrived Europeans. Here, however, I saw one instance where indeed no simulation could be suspected. My companions availed themselves of the diseased condition of a poor old woman who met us in the highway, to practise some rough jokes upon her. The old woman imitated every motion as if impelled by an irresistible impulse, and expressed at the same time the most extreme indig. nation against those who abused her infirmity.

In R. Maak's “ Journey to the Amour," it is recorded :“ It is not unusual for the Maniagri to suffer also from a nervous malady of the most peculiar kind, with which we had already been made acquainted by the descriptions of several travellers.t This malady is met with, for the most part, amongst the wild

* In the country it is believed that swine's flesh often causes this malady. A friend, a physiologist, conjectures the cause to be the free use of very fat pork ; but the Indians commonly eat but little flesh, and the pigs are very seldom fat.

† Compare A. Erman, “ Journey Round the Earth through Northern Asia," vol. iii. sec. i. p. 191.

people of Siberia, as well as amongst the Russians settled there. In the district of the Jakutes, where this affliction very frequently occurs, those affected by it, both Russians and Jakutes, are known by the name of · Emiura ;' but here (that is, in that part of Siberia where the Maniagri live) the same malady is called by the Maniagri · Olon,' and by the Argurian Cossacks · Olgandshi.' The attacks of the malady which I am now mentioning consist in this, that a man suffering from it will, if under the influence of terror or consternation, unconsciously, and often without the smallest sense of shame, imitate everything that passes before him. Should he be offended, he falls into a rage, which manifests itself by wild shrieks and raving ; and he precipitates himself at the same time, with a knife or any other object which may fall to his hand, upon those who have placed him in this predicament. Amongst the Maniagri, women, especially the very aged, are the chief sufferers from this malady; and instances, moreover, of men who were affected by it are likewise known to me. It is worthy of remark that those women who returned home on account of this sickness were notwithstanding strong, and in all other respects enjoyed good health.”

Probably it is only an accidental coincidence that in the Malay countries Sakit-latar and Amok exist together, if not in the same individual, yet amongst the same people. Instances of Amok seem to occur also in the Philippines.* I find the following account in the Diario de Manila of the 21st February, 1866 :In Cavité, on the 18th February, a soldier rushed into the house of a school-teacher, and, struggling with him, stabbed him with a dagger, and then killed the teacher's son with a second stab. Plunging into the street, he stabbed two young girls of ten and twelve years of age and wounded a woman in the side, a boy aged nine in the arm, a coachman (mortally) in the belly, and, besides another woman, a sailor and three soldiers; and arriving at his

* According to Semper, p. 69, in Zamboanga and Basilan.

NASAL ACUTENESS.

161

barracks, where he was stopped by the sentry, he plunged the dagger into his own breast.

It is one of the greatest insults to stride over a sleeping native, or to awaken him suddenly. They rouse one another, when necessity requires, with the greatest circumspection and by the slowest degrees.* The sense of smell is developed amongst the Indians to so great a degree that they are able, by smelling at the pocket-handkerchiefs, to tell to which persons they belong (“ Reisesk.,” p. 39); and lovers at parting exchange pieces of the linen they may be wearing, and during their separation inhale the odour of the beloved being, besides smothering the relics with kisses.f .

* The fear of waking sleeping persons really refers to the widely-spread superstition that during sleep the soul leaves the body; numerous instances of which occur in Bastian's work. Amongst the Tinguianes (North Luzon) the worst of all curses is to this effect: “ May'st thou die sleeping!"- Informe, i. 14.

+ Lewin (“Chittagong Hill Tracks," 1869, p. 46) relates of the mountain people at that place: “ Their manner of kissing is peculiar. Instead of pressing lip to lip, they place the mouth and nose upon the cheek, and inhalę the breath strongly. Their form of speech is not . Give me a kiss,' but • Smell me."