---
title: "MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE BISAYAN INDIAXS"
date: 2022-04-30
image: /covers/travels.jpg
description: ""
linkTitle: "Chapter 22"
linkb: "/research/jagor/ph"
linkbtext: "Index"
linkf: "/research/jagor/ph"
linkftext: "Index"
author: Juan
icon: /icons/spmat.png
---


The Bisayans—at least the inhabitants of the islands of Sámar and Leyté (I have not become closely acquainted with any others)

—belong to one race.* They are, physically and intellectually, in character, dress, manners and customs, so similar that my notes, which were originally made at different points of the two islands, have, after removal of the numerous repetitions, fused into one, which affords a more complete picture, and affords, at the same time, opportunity for the small differences, where they do occur, to stand out more conspicuously.

There are no negritos either in Sámar or Leyté, but many Cimarronese, who pay no tribute, and who do not live in villages, but independently in the forests. Unfortunately I have had no personal intercourse with them, and what I have learned respecting

* Pintados or Bisayos, according to a native word denoting the same, must be the inhabitants of the islands between Luzon and Mindanao, and must have been 80 named by the Spaniards froin their practice of tattooing themselves. Crawford (“ Dict.” 339) thinks these facts not firmly established, and they are certainly not mentioned by Pigafetta ; who, however, writos, p. 80 :-“He (the king of Zubu) was . . . painted in various ways with fire." Purchas (“ Pilgrimage," fo. i. 603)“ The king of Zubut had his skinne painted with a hot iron pensill;" and Morga, fo. 4—“Traen todo il cuerpo labrado con fuego." From this they appear to have tattooed themselves in the manner of the Papuas, by burning in spots and stripes into the skin. But Morga states in another place (f. 138)-.“ They are distinguished from the inhabitants of Luzon by their hair, which the men cut into a pigtail after the old Spanish manner, and paint their bodies in many patterns, without touching the face." The custom of tattooing, which appears to have ceased with the introduction of Christianity, for the clergyınan so often quoted (Thévenot, p. 4) describes it as unknown, cannot be regarded as a characteristic of the Bisayans; and tribes of the northern part of Luzon tattoo at the present day.

them from the Christian inhabitants of Sámar is too uncertain to be repeated. But it does seem that all these Cimarronese or their ancestors have traded with the Spaniards, and that their religion has appropriated many Catholic forms. Thus, when planting rice, and, according to ancient practices, setting apart some of the seed to be offered in the four corners of the field as

sacrifice, they are accustomed to repeat some mutilated Catholic prayers, which they appear to consider as efficacious as their old heathenish ones. Some have their children baptized as well, as it costs nothing; but, save in these respects, they perform no other Christian or civil obligations. They are very peaceable, neither making war with one another, nor having poisoned arrows. Instances of Cimarronese, who go over to Christianity and village life, together with tribute and servitude, are

extremely rare; and the numA Bisayan Indian. Camisa of guinara ; saya of European cotton; ber of the Indians, who reand hat of Nito (lygodium).

turn to the forests in order to become Cimarronese, is, on the other hand, very inconsiderable indeed—still smaller than in Luzon, as the natives, from the dull, almost vegetating life which they lead, are not easily brought into such straitened circumstances as to be compelled to leave their village, which, still more than in Luzon, is all the world to them.

The culture of rice follows the seasons of the year. In some RICE CULTIVATION.

places where there are large fields the plough (arado) and the sodsod (here called surod) are employed; but, almost universally, the rice-field is only trodden over by buffaloes in the rainy season. Sowing is done on the west coast in May and June, planting in July and August, and reaping from November to January. One ganta of seed-corn gives two, sometimes from three to four, cabanes (i.e., fifty, seventy-five, and a hundred fold). In the chief town, Catbalogan, there are but very few irrigated fields (tubigan, from tubig, water), the produce of which does not suffice for the requirements, and the deficiency is made up from other places on the coasts of the island. On the other hand, Catbalogan produces abaca, cocoa-nut oil, wax, balate (edible holothuria, sea cucumber), dried fish, and woven stuffs. On the north and east coasts sowing takes place from November to January, and reaping six months later. During the remaining six months the field serves as pasture for the cattle ; but in many places rice culture goes on even during these months, but on other fields. A large portion of this rice is frequently lost on account of the bad weather.

Purchases of land are seldom made, it being generally acquired by cultivation, by inheritance, or forfeiture. In Catbalogan the best rice land was paid for at the rate of one dollar for a ganta of seed-corn, and, on the north coast of Láuang, a field producing yearly one hundred cabanes was purchased for thirty dollars. Reckoning, as in Nága, one ganta of seed-corn at four loanes, and seventy-five cabanes of produce at one quiñon, the eastern rice land costs, in the first instance, three thalers and a third, in the second three thalers. The owner lets the bare property out on leases, and receives one-half the harvest as rent.*

The cultivation of rice in Leyté is conducted as in Sámar, but it has given way to the cultivation of abaca ; the governors, while they were allowed to trade, compelled the natives to devote a

* Mezzeria (Italian); inétayer (French).

part of their fields and of their labour to it. Should a peasant be in arrears, it is the prevalent custom in the country for him to pay to the dealer double the balance remaining due at the next harvest.

Rice culture, which in Catbalogan is almost the only harvest gained, requires no other implement of agriculture than the wood knife, to loosen the soil somewhat, and a sharp stick for making holes at distances of six inches for the reception of five or six grains of rice. Sowing is done from May to June, weeding twice, and five months later it is cut stalk by stalk; the reaper receiving half a real daily wages and food. The produce is between two and three cabanes per ganta, or fifty to seventy fold. The land costs nothing, and wages amount to nearly five reals per ganta of seed-corn. After a good harvest the caban fetches four reals ; but just before the barvest the price rises to one dollar, and often much higher. The ground is used only once for dry rice; camote (batata), abaca, and caladium being planted on it after the harvest. Mountain rice is more remunerative than rice of the valley, about in the proportion of nine to eight.

Next to rice the principal articles of sustenance are camote (convolvulus batatas), ubi (dioscorea), gabi (caladium), paláuán (a large arum, with taper leaves and spotted stalk). Camote can be planted all the year round, and ripens in four months; but it takes place generally when the rice culture is over, when little labour is available. When the cultivation of camote is retained, the old plants are allowed to multiply by their runners, and only the tubers are taken out of the ground. But larger produce is obtained by cleaning out the ground and planting anew. From eight to fifteen gantas may be had for half a real, and a sack for about three to six sgr. *

Although there are large plantations of abaca, during my

* With us the sack of potatoes costs on the average, in the country, ten, in the town, twenty sgr.

 [blocks in formation]
visit it was but little cultivated, the price not being sufficiently remunerative.

Tobacco also is cultivated. Formerly it might be sold in the country, but now it has to be delivered at the hacienda.

A resinous oil, balão or malapájo, is found in Sámar and Albáy, probably also in other provinces. It is obtained from a dipterocarpus (apiton), one of the loftiest trees of the forest, by cutting in the trunk a wide hole, half a foot deep, hollowed out into the form of a basin, and from time to time lighting a fire in it, so as to free the channels through which it flows of obstructions. The oil thus drained is collected daily and comes into commerce without any further preparation. Its chief application is in the preservation of iron in ship-building. Nails dipped in the oil of the baláo, before being driven in, will, as I have been assured by credible individuals, defy the action of rust for ten years ; but it is principally used as a varnish for ships, which are painted with it both within and without, and it also protects wood against termites and other insects. The balão is sold in Albáy at four reals for the tinaja of ten gantas (the litre at eight pence). A cement formed by the mixture of burnt lime, gum elemi, and cocoa-nut oil, in such proportions as to form a thick paste before application, is used for the protection of the bottoms of ships ; and the coating is said to last a year. *

Wax is bartered by the Cimarronese. The whole of Sámar annually yields from two hundred to three hundred picos, whose value ranges between twenty-five and fifty dollars per pico, while in Manila the price is generally five to ten dollars higher ; but it fluctuates very much, as the same product is brought from many other localities and at very irregular intervals of time.

There is hardly any breeding of cattle, notwithstanding the * In China an oil is procured from the seeds of vernicia montana, which, by the addition of alum, litharge, and steatite, with a gentle heat, easily forms a valuable varnish, which, when mixed with resin, is employed in rendering the bottoms of vessels watertight. P. Champion, “ Indust. Anc. et Mod. de l'Emp. Chinois," 114.

luxuriant growth of grasses and the absence of destructive animals. Horses and buffaloes are very rare, and are said to have been introduced late, not before the present century. As in Sámar there are hardly any other country roads than the seashore and the shallow beds of rivers (it is better in the north of Leyté), the buffalo is used only once every year in treading over the earth of the rice-field. During the rest of the year he roams at large on the pastures, in the forest, or on a small island, where such exists, in the neighbourhood. It is very rare to see several buffaloes, attached to the large trunk of a tree, dragging it to the village, and their number, therefore, is extremely small. Buffaloes which tread the rice land well are worth as much as ten dollars. The mean price is three dollars for a buffalo-bull, and five to six dollars for a buffalo-cow. Horned cattle are only occasionally used as victims at festivals. The property of several owners, they are very limited in number, and live half-wild in the mountains. There is hardly any trade in them, but the average price is three dollars for a heifer, and five or six dollars for a cow. Almost every family possesses a pig; some, three or four of them. A fat pig costs six or seven dollars, even more than a cow. Many Indian tribes abstain strictly from beef; but pork is essential to their feasts. Grease, too, is so dear that from three to four dollars would, under favourable circumstances, be got on that account for a fat animal. Sheep and goats thrive well, and propagate easily, but also exist only in small numbers, and are hardly utilised either for their wool or their flesh. Creoles and mestizes are for the most part too idle even to keep sheep, preferring daily to eat fowls. The sheep of Shanghai, imported by the governor of Taclóban, also thrive and propagate famously. A laying hen costs half a real, a cock the same, and a game cock as much as three dollars, often considerably more. Six or eight hens, or thirty eggs, may be bought for one real.

A family consisting of father, mother, and five children DOMESTIC ECONOMY.

291

requires daily nearly twenty-four chupas of palay (rice in the husk), which, after winnowing, comes to about twelve chupas. This at the average price of four reals per caban costs about half a real. The price, however, varies. Sometimes, after the harvest, it is three reals per caban; before it, ten ; and in Albay, even about thirty reals. Then about three cuartos are wanted for extras (as fish, crabs, vegetables, etc.), which, however, are generally collected by the children ; and, lastly, for oil two cu., buyo one cu., tobacco three cu. (three leaves for one cu.), the latter being smoked, not chewed. A woman consumes half as much buyo and tobacco as a man. Buyo and tobacco are less used in Leyté than in Sámar.

For clothing a man requires yearly-four rough shirts of guinara, costing from one to two reals; three or four hose, at one to two and a half reals ; two handkerchiefs for the head, at one and a half real (hats are not worn on the south and west coasts), and for the church festivals generally one pair of shoes, seven reals; one fine shirt, a dollar or more; and fine hose, four reals. A woman requires—four to six camisas of guinara, at one real; two to three sayas of guinara, at three to four reals, and one or two sayas of European printed cotton, at five reals; two handkerchiefs, at one and a half to two reals; and one or two pairs of slippers (chinelas) to go to mass in, at two reals and upwards.

The women generally have, besides, a fine camisa costing at least six reals; a mantilla for churchgoing, six reals (it lasts four years); and a comb, two cu. Many also have under-petticoats (nabuas), two pieces at four reals, and earrings of brass and a rosary, which last articles are purchased once for all. In the poorer localities, Láuang for instance, only the home-woven guinaras are worn; and there a man requires—three shirts and three hose, which are cut out of three pieces of guinara, at two reals, and a salacot (hat), generally home made, worth half a real ; while a woman uses, yearly-four sayas, value six reals; and a camisa, with a finer one for the feasts, eight reals. Underpetticoats are not worn ; and the clothing of the children may be estimated at about half of the above rates.

For household furniture a family has a cooking pot * of unglazed burnt clay, imported by ships from Manila, the cost of which is fixed by the value of its contents in rice; a supply of bamboo-canes; seven plates, costing between two and five cu.; a carahai (iron pan), three to four reals; cocoa-nut shells serving for glasses; a few small pots, altogether half a real ; a sundang, four to six reals, or a bolo (large wood knife), one dollar; and a pair of scissors (for the women), two reals. The loom, which every household constructs for itself of bamboo, of course costs nothing.

The rate of daily wages, in the case of native employers, is half a real, without food; but Europeans always have to give one real and food, unless, by favour of the gobernadorcillo, they get polistas at the former rate, which then regularly goes into the public coffers. An ordinary carpenter earns from one to two reals; a skilful man, three reals daily. The hours of work are from six to noon, and from two to six in the evening.

Almost every village has a rude smith, who understands the making of sundạngs and bolos; but the iron and the coal required for the purpose must be supplied with the order. No other work in metal is executed. With the exception of a little shipbuilding, hardly any other pursuit than weaving is carried on; the loom is rarely wanting in a household. Guinara, i.e., stuff made of the abaca, is manufactured, as well as also some piña, or figured silk stuffs, the silk being brought from Manila, and of Chinese origin. All these fabrics are made in private homes ; there is no factory.

In places where rice is scarce the lower class of people catch COMMERCIAL LIFE.

* Petzholdt (* Caucasus," i. 203) mentions that in Bosslewi the price of a clay vessel is determined by its capacity of maize.

293

fish, salt and dry them, and barter them for rice. In the chief towns purchases are made with the current money; but, in the interior, where there is hardly any money, fabrics and dried fish are the most usual means of exchange. Salt is obtained by evaporating the sea-water in small iron hand-pans (carahais), without previous evaporation in the sun. The navigation between Catbalogan and Manila continues from December to July, and in the interval between those months the ships lie dismantled under sheds. There also is communication by the coast eastwards to Guíuan, northwards to Catárman, and sometimes to Láuang. The crews consist partly of natives, and partly of foreigners, as the natives take to the sea with great reluctance; indeed, almost only when compelled to leave their villages. Sámar has scarcely any other means of communication besides the navigation of the coast and rivers, the interior being roadless; and burdens have to be conveyed on the shoulders. An able-bodied porter, who receives a real and a half without food, will carry three arrobas (seventy-five pounds at most) six leagues in a day, but he cannot accomplish the same work on the following day, requiring at least one day's rest. A strong man will carry an arroba and a half daily for a distance of six leagues for a whole week.

There are no markets in Sámar and Leyté ; so that whoever wishes to buy seeks what he requires in the several houses, and in like manner the seller offers his goods.

An Indian seeking to borrow money has to give ample security and pay interest at the rate of one real for every dollar per month (twelve and a half per cent. monthly); and it is not easy for him to borrow more than five dollars, for which sum only he can be legally imprisoned, Trade and credit are less developed in eastern and northern Samar than in the western part of the island, which keeps up a more active communication with the other inhabitants of the Archipelago. There current money is rarely lent, but only its value in goods is advanced at the rate of

us,

a real per dollar per mensem. If the debtor fails to pay within the time appointed, he frequently has to part with one of his children, who is obliged to serve the lender for his bare food, without wages, until the debt has been extinguished. I saw a young man who had so served for the term of five years, in liquidation of a debt of five dollars which his father, who had formerly been a gobernadorcillo in Paranas, owed to a mestize in Catbalogan ; and on the east coast a pretty young girl, who, for a debt of three dollars due by her father, had then, for two years, served a native, who had the reputation of being a spendthrift. I was shown in Borongan a cocoa-nut plantation of three hundred trees, which was pledged for a debt of ten dollars about twenty years ago, since which period it had been used by the creditor as his own property; and it was only a few years since that, upon the death of the debtor, his children succeeded, with great difficulty, in paying the original debt and redeeming the property. It is no uncommon thing for a native to borrow two dollars and a half from another in order to purchase his exemption from the forty days of annual service, and then, failing to repay the loan punctually, to serve his creditor for a whole year. *

The inhabitants of Sámar and Leyté, who are at once idler and filthier than those of Luzon, seem to be as much behind the Bicols as the latter are behind the Tagalese. In Tacloban, where a more active intercourse with Manila exists, these qualities are less pronounced, and the women, who are agreeable, bathe frequently. For the rest, the inhabitants of the two islands are

* As usual, these abuses spring from the non-enforcement of a statute passed in 1848 (Leg. ult, i. 144), which prohibits usurious contracts with servants or assistants, and threatens with heavy penalties all those who, under the pretext of having advanced money, or of having paid debts or the poll-tax or exemption from service, keep either individual natives or whole families in a continual state of dependence upon them, and always secure the increase of their obligations to them by not allowing them wayez sufficient to cnable them to satisiy the claims against them.

 [blocks in formation]
friendly, obliging, tractable, and peaceable. Abusive language or violence very rarely occurs, and, in case of injury, information is laid against the offender at the tribunal. Great purity of manners seems to prevail on the north and west coasts, but not on the east coast, nor in Leyté. External piety is universally conspicuous, through the training imparted by the priests; the families are very united, and great influence is wielded by the women, who are principally engaged in household employments, and are tolerably skilful in weaving, and to whom only the lighter labours of the field are assigned. The authority of the parents and of the eldest brother is supreme, the younger sisters never venturing to oppose it; women and children are kindly treated.

The natives of Leyté, clinging as strongly to their native soil as those of Sámar, like them, have no partiality for the sea, though their antipathy to it is not quite so manifest as that of the inhabitants of Sámar. *

There are no benevolent institutions in either of the two islands. Each family maintains its own poor and crippled, and treats them tenderly. In Catbalogan, the chief town of the island, with five to six thousand inhabitants, there were only eight recipients of charity; but in Albáy mendicants are not wanting. In Láuang, when a Spaniard, on a solemn festival, had caused it to be proclaimed that he would distribute rice to the poor, not a single applicant came forward. The honesty of the inhabitants of Sámar is much commended. Obligations are said to be contracted almost always without written documents, and never forsworn, even when they make default in payment. Robberies are of rare occurrence in Sámar, and thefts almost unknown. There are schools also here in the pueblos, which accomplish quite as much as they do in Camarines.

• Formerly it appears to have been different with them. “ These Bisayans are a people little disposed to agriculture, but practised in navigation, and eager for war and expeditions by sea, on account of the pillage and prizes, which they call inangubas,' which is the same as taking to the field in order to steal.”—Morga, f. 138.

Of the public amusements cock-fighting is the chief, but it is not so eagerly pursued as in Luzon. At the church festivals they perform a drama translated from the Spanish, generally of a religious character; and the expense of the entertainment is defrayed by voluntary contributions of the wealthy. The chief vices of the population are play and drunkenness; in which latter even women and young girls occasionally indulge. The marriage feasts, combining song and dance, often continue for several days and nights together, where they have a sufficient supply of food and drink. The suitor has to serve in the house of the bride's parents two, three, and even five years, before he takes his bride home; and money cannot purchase exemption from this onerous restriction. He boards in the house of the bride's parents who furnish the rice, but he has to supply the vegetables himself.*

At the expiration of his term of service he builds, with the assistance of his relations and friends, the house for the family which is about to be newly established.

Though adultery is frequent, jealousy is rare, and never leads to violence. The injured individual generally goes with the culprit to the minister, who, with a severe lecture to one, and words of consolation to the other, sets everything straight again. Married women are more easily accessible than girls, whose prospect of marriage, however, is hardly diminished by a false step during single life. While under parental authority girls, as a rule, are kept under rigid control, doubtless in order to prolong the time of servitude of the suitor. External appearance is more strictly regarded among the Bisayans than by the Bicols and Tagalese.

* Nl-usage prevails to a great extent, although prohibited by a stringent law; the non-enforcement of which by the alcaldes is charged with a penalty of 100 dollars for every single case of neglect. In many provinces the bridegroom pays to the bride's mother, besides the dower, an indemnity for the mother's milk which the bride has enjoyed (bigay susu). According to Colin (" Labor Evangelico," p. 129) the penhimuyat, the present which the mother received for night-watching and care during the bringing up of the bride, amounted to one-fifth of the dowry.

 [blocks in formation]
Here also the erroneous opinion prevails, that the number of the women exceeds that of the men. Instances occur of girls of twelve being mothers; but they are rare; and the women bear twelve or thirteen children, many of whom, however, do not live. So much so is this the case, that families of more than six or eight children are very rarely met with.

Superstition is rife. Besides the little Catholic images of . the Virgin, which every female Indian wears by a string round the neck, many also have heathen amulets, of which I had an opportunity of examining one that had been taken from a very daring criminal. It consisted of a small ounce flask, stuffed full of vegetable root fibres, which appeared to have been fried in oil. This flask, which is prepared by the heathen tribes, is accredited with the virtue of making its owner strong and courageous. The capture of this individual was very difficult; but, as soon as the little flask was taken from him, he gave up all resistance, and allowed himself to be bound. In almost every large village there are one or more Asuán families who are generally dreaded and avoided, and regarded as outlaws, and who can marry only amongst themselves. They have the reputation of being cannibals. Perhaps they are descended from such tribes ? At any rate, the belief is very general and firmly rooted ; and intelligent old Indians, when questioned by me on the subject, answered that they certainly did not believe that the Asuáns ate men at the present time, but that their forefathers had assuredly done so.*

Of ancient legends, traditions, or ballads, it is stated that there are none. It is true they have songs at their dances, but these are spiritless improvisations, and mostly in a high key. They have not preserved any memorials of former civilisation. “The

* Veritable cannibals are not mentioned by the older authors on the Philippines. Pigafetta (p. 127) heard that a people lived on a river at Cape Benuian (north of Mindanao) who ate only the hearts of their captured enemies, along with lemonjuice; and Dr. Semper (“* Philippines,” 62) found the same custom, with the excep. tion of the lemon-juice, on the east coast of Mindanao.

ancient Pintados possessed no temples, every one performing his anitos in his own house, without any special solemnity”—(Morga, f. 145 v). Pigafetta (p. 92) certainly mentions that the King of Cebu, after his conversion to Christianity, caused many temples built on the seashore to be destroyed; but these might only have been structures of a very perishable kind. On certain occasions the Bisayans celebrated a great festival, called Pandot, at which they worshipped their gods in huts, which were expressly built for the purpose, covered with foliage, and adorned with flowers and lamps. They called these huts simba or simbahan (the churches are so called to the present day), “and this is the only thing which they have similar to a church or a temple"-(Informe, I. i., 17). According to Gemelli Careri they prayed to some particular gods, derived from their forefathers, who are called by the Bisayans Davata (Divata), and by the Tagalese Anito; one anito being for the sea and another for the house, to watch over the children.* In the number of these anitos they placed their grandfathers and great grandfathers, whom they invoked in all their necessities, and in whose honour they preserved little statues of stone, wood, gold, and ivory, which they called liche or laravan. Amongst their gods they also reckoned all who perished by the sword, or were killed by lightning, or devoured by crocodiles, believing that their souls ascended to heaven on a bow which they called balangas. Pigafetta thus describes the idols which were seen by him :-“They are of wood, and concave, or hollow, without any hind quarters, with their arms extended, and their legs and feet bent upwards. They have very large faces, with four powerful teeth like boars' tusks, and are painted all over.” †

* The Anito occurs amongst the tribes of the Malayan Archipelago as Antu, but the Anito of the Philippines is essentially a protecting spirit, while the Malayan Antu is rather of a demoniacal kind.

† These idol images have never come under my observation. Those figured in Bastian and Hartmann's “Journal of Ethnology" (b. i. pl. viii. “Idols from the

EARLY RELIGION

In conclusion, let me take a brief account of the religion of the ancient Bisayans from Fr. Gaspar :

The dæmon, or genius, to whom they sacrificed was called by them Divata, which appears to denote an antithesis to the Deity, and a rebel against him. Hell was called Solad, and Heaven (in their highly figurative language) Ologan .... The souls of the departed go to a mountain in the province of Oton, called Medias, where they are well entertained and served.

The creation of the universe is thus explained. A vulture hovering between heaven and earth finds no place to settle himself upon, and the water rises towards heaven; whereupon Heaven, in its wrath, creates islands. The vulture splits a bamboo, out of which spring man and woman, who beget many children, and, when their number becomes too great, drive them out with blows. Some conceal themselves in the chamber, and these become the Datos; others in the kitchen, and these become the slaves. The rest go down the stairs and become the people.

Philippines)," whose originals are in the Ethnographical Museum of Berlin, were certainly acquired in the Philippines, but, according to A. W. Franks, undoubtedly belong to the Solomon Islands. Sections ii. to viji., p 46, in the cattlogue of the Museum at Prague are entitled :-"Four heads of idols, made of wood, from the Philippines, contributed by the Bohemian naturalist Thaddäus Hänke, who was commissioned by the King of Spain, in the year 1817, to travel in the islands of the South Sea." The photographs, which were obligingly introduced here at my desire by the direction of the museum, do not entirely correspond to the above description, pointing rather to the west coast of America, the principal field of Hänke's researches. The Reliquiæ Botanicæ, from his posthumous papers, likewise afford no information respecting the origin of those idols.

