---
title: "Synthesis and Analysis"
# heading: "Chapter 7 of Australia's Constitution Simplified"
date: 2021-11-20
image: "/covers/discourses.jpg"
description: "Vicára is 'justice' in English. It means a particular type of mental process to ascertain the truth"
linkb: /research/sarkar/
linkbtext: "Index"
linkf: /research/sarkar/
linkftext: "Index"
icon: "/icons/sarkar.jpg"
---


Human beings have an instinctive and limitless desire for all-round victory in all spheres of life. In any sphere of life – whether important or unimportant – it is inconceivable for people to live an undignified life. The idea of moving along a fixed path, subservient to nature, is repugnant to human psychology. Where human beings do conform to the rules of nature under the pressure of circumstances it is due to their blatant lack of adequate stamina and intellect.

All human Sádhaná or spiritual practice is directed towards removing internal weakness. In order to overcome their imperfections, people constantly welcome ideological conflicts and thus create newer and newer ideologies. This is how human society evolved and established a great and rational ideology conducive to the highest fulfillment of life. However, not all human energy is exhausted in removing mental imperfections. As people have to maintain their existence in this apparently adverse physical world, naturally they must make constant endeavours in the physical sphere. In order to conquer static Prakriti, physical science or Bhaotika Vijiṋána evolved. The Saḿskrta word “Vijiṋána”, however, is not synonymous with the English word “science”, because in Saḿskrta, Vijiṋána stands for Brahma-Vijiṋána, intuitional science or spiritual science.

Nowadays a group of people allege that science is the root of all evils and that new scientific inventions have created dissention in human society, pushing human civilization along the path of destruction. It is necessary to cautiously and persistently analyse this opinion with an open mind. The moment human beings see the possibility of defeat in war in the physical sphere they evolve new weapons to meet the challenge. The role of physical science is to discover new formulae and to assist in the development of weapons. Had there been no physical clash and cohesion, subtle human intellect would have remained totally unknown to us. Such conflict and evolution occurs in every unit or organism. Thus all organisms develop scientific thought processes according to their respective mental proclivities and capabilities. For instance, the building of nests by bats, the constructing of pathways by white ants and the weaving of webs by spiders proves that these undeveloped creatures have a knowledge of science.
Today many of you have assembled here at Gorakhpur. Had there been no scientific progress you would have been forced to walk to this place from your homes. Now I ask you, could you have done that from such far off places? In order to overcome physical and mental disadvantages and inconveniences, people of a particular era invented and popularized bullock carts for transportation. Later they developed even more fast moving horse driven vehicles. Subsequently, with the change of eras, public demands also began to progressively change. This explains why different types of transportation such as motor cars, aeroplanes and more recently rockets were invented in different periods. None of these inventions deserve criticism. They are simply different inventions designed to meet the different mental demands suitable to that age.
We know that guŕ or molasses cannot normally be preserved for a long time because of natural influences. Moreover, many people do not even like the taste of molasses. These two reasons led to the invention of sugar through scientific means. Now, can anyone say that the discovery of sugar has been an impediment to human progress? If someone considers molasses more nutritious than sugar, then would it not be scientifically wiser to enrich sugar with nutritious ingredients? Or would it be better to propagate in favour of molasses?
Some people seem to enjoy making useless criticisms against science all the time. Such criticisms, of course, come from those who have lost their vitality and capacity to adjust to new situations, and from those who, due to their physical inertia, have accepted some dogmatic notion as established fact.
The momentum of the past can easily prevent people from adapting to new innovations and circumstances, causing them to deliberately reject the contributions of science. As long as these people are unable to establish psychic parallelism with new scientific discoveries, they vehemently criticize those very things which they themselves are often compelled to utilize. For example, those who are bitter critics of modern medical science and eloquently praise primitive medical methods, do not object to using bandages approved and prescribed by modern allopathy. Even staunch advocates of Khadi or hand spun cloth wear mill made clothes, the protagonists of “molasses philosophy” take sugared tea, and the blind supporters of bullock carts travel by airplanes to deliver hot, fiery speeches in anti-science meetings. But after some time, when they become used to new applications of modern technology, they stop their criticism and hatred of science. Things which they initially criticized now become easy for them to use. The non-availability and short supply of old things gradually forces them to adapt to new innovations.
From this it is evident that those who criticize science in reality want to turn the onward current of the Ganges backwards towards it source, which totally contradicts the principles of dynamics. Such an endeavour indicates a negative mentality. No amounts of shaking the world upside down will ever bring back the era of Rśi hermitages or hermits’ groves. The general mass will never wear the bark of trees instead of mill made clothing or eat raw flesh in preference to cooked food. Nor will they go back to the molasses era from the sugar age. Perhaps those who have never tasted sugar would like to live in the molasses age, but once people have come in contact with sugar they will never fully subscribe to molasses, even by mistake. The reason for this is that their enjoyment of sugared tea has become common and natural. Of course, to enter into such a controversy over molasses and sugar is meaningless because molasses too was once discovered through scientific endeavour.
Conflicts in the physical sphere gradually awaken dormant human potentialities. Environmental influences also increase the complexities of the human body. The problems of ancient and modern people are by no means identical. In an effort to keep pace with the changing speed of life, the human body and mind have gradually become more complicated. The physical structures of ancient people would have certainly been unfit for solving the problems of today.
As the mind becomes more complex its direct centres, the nerve-cells, and its indirect centres, the glands, undergo corresponding changes. As the nature of problems changes the human mind becomes engaged in making new scientific discoveries. Hence I am compelled to say that the cultivation of science must go forward. This will never stand in the way of human progress. Due to their emotionalism, most of the critics of science do not want to recognize this obvious fact. They do not realize that their blind allegiance to the past is only propelling the flow of their minds towards inertness. They are making their minds more and more reactionary and losing their psychic dynamism. Those who have lost the rhythm of life’s dynamism should be called static and inert.
The human mind must always be kept preoccupied with different progressive thoughts and practices, according to the change in time. In order to carry out new responsibilities, necessary changes take place in the nerve cells of the human brain. This is accompanied by changes in the glandular structure of the human body. It is not only the physical and mental structures of human beings that are getting more complex, but also the entire human society. More complex social problems are arising. In such circumstances, should we remain smug and complacent, silent and inactive, only harping on the great and glorious past? No. Instead, we should probe for solutions to problems through the proper cultivation of science. As the proverb goes, “As the sword so the scabbard”. No matter how complicated problems are, we have to evolve the necessary scientific means to meet the challenge. We certainly do not want to become an object of ridicule by fighting against powerful atomic weapons with only primitive bows and arrows.
The more complex the human body becomes, the more control human beings exert over it. With the progress of science it may be possible to send only a person’s brain to London, keeping their body here at Gorakhpur. There would be no need to transport the body to London. Although this sounds like a fairy tale, this will surely happen. Then people will be able to enjoy a safe, sound sleep while their limbs are deposited securely in a body bank.
The social cycle moves constantly in a cyclic order. That is to say, with the continuance of class struggle, one class or another dominates a particular era. Now if science remains completely controlled by static minded people, the results will be hopeless. If class struggle continues unabated, humanity must finally understand that none but Sadvipras can be the leaders of society. I call Sadvipras only those who strictly follow the principles of Yama and Niyama. The fullest possibilities for the establishment of peace and human progress lie only in the collective endeavours of Sadvipras. Not even democracy can solve human problems, because in a democracy one particular class gets the greatest opportunities to dominate while other classes are substantially deprived of their freedom. As democracy does not recognize any cardinal principles of morality, then rivalry, jealousy, meanness, immorality, etc., take deep root and flourish unchecked. Moreover, the colour and form of democracy keep changing because it continually gives importance to relative truths as its cardinal principles. The establishment of a classless society is only possible by those people who accept the Supreme Entity as the goal of their lives – whose entire mental energy is ceaselessly applied to one supreme goal. All classes will have to unite in a society free from class warfare and strive to implement a common ideal on a common platform. This can only be done by Sadvipras. To ensure the future welfare of the universe, the dictatorship of Sadvipras is an absolute necessity.
The establishment of such an ideal is not possible within the democratic system because candidates depend on thieves, habituated criminals and antisocial elements for votes. Able and competent candidates are defeated by those who have absolutely no experience in politics, administration, education, intelligence, policy making, etc. Such people are entrusted with the responsibility of determining the fate of society as the people’s representatives.
Most individual and social problems can be solved by Sadvipras through the proper cultivation of science. Science is certainly capable of solving most of the land problems which exist in some degree in all countries of the world. The importance and value of land will automatically diminish if the problems of food production are solved. In the future a synthetic food tablet may be enough to satisfy a person’s hunger. The production of abundant quantities of such tablets in scientific laboratories will remove the disparity between the rich and the poor, because the poor, under the pangs of hunger, are forced to become slaves of the rich, providing the rich with ample opportunities for the accumulation of more wealth to satisfy their greed. Even prior to the production of synthetic food, science contributed in many ways to solving food problems. While the world’s population is ever-increasing, the total area of land is not increasing proportionately. Yet with limited land at their disposal, people are increasing food production through scientifically prepared manure, high-yield seeds, irrigation systems, etc. So we see that science is indispensable for human progress, and without it half the population of the world today would die of starvation.
We know too that medical science has helped people immensely in the past, continues to help them in the present, and will similarly help them in the future. For a long time, developed medicine and surgery have been helping people increase their longevity. If people could give senility and death the slip by replacing old glands with new ones, what else could they want? Humanity is now capable of doing this through medical science. One of the reasons the physical body dies is because its glands become old and weak. So death can be postponed if a person’s glands are replaced.
Of course humans will not achieve immortality by cheating death temporarily or by enhancing their longevity a little, because they possess yet another faculty, the brain. Mental feelings like “I am”, “I do”, etc., are expressed by the brain. Naturally the brain will become fatigued and distorted if its existence is prolonged and it is used incessantly. If the entire brain is replaced, the whole personality will undergo radical changes. In such a case a new personality emerges and the former one ceases to exist.
By proper scientific experiment and research it is even possible to bring about a change in the glandular structure of the body. As a consequence even a dishonest person can be turned into an honest one. But this cannot change the previously acquired Saḿskaras or reactive momenta of the mind. While this process may change people’s customary behaviour patterns, their idioplasmic expressions or tendencies cannot be stopped. The brain is the receptacle of the mind, and the mind is the receptacle of Saḿskáras. Now, as a result of the replacement of the brain, the mind, with all its reactive momenta, will have to take a completely new receptacle, and in that case the person will be an entirely new being. With the help of science if a person’s brain is replaced with a monkey’s brain, then the person ceases to be the owner of that body. From the standpoint of psychology that depersonalised body is no longer human and it will gradually take the form of a monkey’s body. The secretions from the glands will also become like those of a monkey. In exactly the same way changing a man into a woman or vice versa is not impossible. Not only this, changing the glandular secretions in the human body is also possible through strong mental ideation, through a powerful, vibrational ideation of the mind. Hence, by this process also a man could be changed into a woman and vice versa. Thus it would not be impossible for a man to conceive children through the partial change of his glands. But when all this is said and done, science can never change a person’s Saḿskáras. Therefore, there is no alternative for human beings other than spiritual practice or Sádháná for the development of their personalities.
For human progress the cultivation of science must always be welcomed, but it is desirable that this cultivation of science should be carried out under the supervision of Sadvipras.
A day will come when human beings will reproduce themselves in scientific laboratories. Not only that, in the future spermatozoa and ova will be created in laboratories. Thus, slowly and gradually, human beings will lose their reproductive power, but the reproductive urge in the human mind will never be lost. Since the potential for creation abides in the original Creator, Saguna Brahma, the Subjectivated Transcendentality, the reproductive urge necessarily remains ingrained in each person, as we are all held in the Supreme Entity. From the auspicious day that humanity develops this capacity, it will step out of the limitations of the Kámamaya Kośa or the crude mental body, and be able to fulfill its supreme purpose in creation through subtler pursuits. Then human beings will evolve a more ideal society and create better literature and more progressive art.
My personal opinion is that atomic bombs can never totally destroy human civilization, for humanity has not yet become intellectually bankrupt. The conflict between Vidyá and Avidyá, or the introversive and extroversive forces respectively, is now going on intensely. So I cannot but come to the clear conclusion that humanity is sure to discover a new weapon to counter the atomic menace in the very near future. This will also conclusively establish that science has a great and sublime role to play in promoting human welfare.
date not known
Published in: 
A Few Problems Solved Part 2
Discourses on Neohumanist Education [a compilation]
Prout in a Nutshell Part 6 [a compilation]
The Great Universe: Discourses on Society [a compilation]
Chapter 2Previous chapter: Synthesis and AnalysisNext chapter: Human Society Is One and Indivisible -- 1Beginning of book	A Few Problems Solved Part 2
Dialectical Materialism and Democracy
Published in: 
A Few Problems Solved Part 2
Prout in a Nutshell Part 6 [a compilation]
The Great Universe: Discourses on Society [a compilation]
Universal Humanism [a compilation]
Notes:
Prior to the publication of A Few Problems Solved Part 1 in 1987, there was an English book entitled Abhimata [Opinion] which comprised of the two articles in what is now A Few Problems Solved Part 1, plus “Synthesis and Analysis” and “Dialectical Materialism and Democracy” – the first two articles in what is now A Few Problems Solved Part 2.

official source: A Few Problems Solved Part 2

this version: is the printed A Few Problems Solved Part 2, 1st edition, version (obvious spelling, punctuation and typographical mistakes only may have been corrected). I.e., this is the most up-to-date version as of the present Electronic Edition.

Dialectical Materialism and Democracy
Social advancement is the triadic blending of thesis, antithesis and synthesis. When a particular theory or thesis loses its competence and power to effect the collective welfare, an antithesis is created against the prevalent theory. As a result of clash and cohesion between these two opposing forces a resultant is created, and this resultant is called synthesis. Is it true that the welfare of society is only possible in the stage of synthesis? When those who have the duty and responsibility for materializing social welfare neglect minorities or the people in general, the synthesis of a particular age transforms itself into the thesis of the next age.
The underlying principles that are relevant to the question of social justice are: the universe is a moving phenomenon, like a moving panorama; everything in this empirical world has its roots in relativity; and everything is moving within the orbit of time, space and person.
In the stage of synthesis a particular social, economic and political theory may be beneficial in a particular place or to a particular group, but this is no guarantee that the same theory will prove equally beneficial with changes in time, space and person. In changed circumstances oppressed people, who pass their days in distraction and despair as victims of social injustice, put up an antithesis against the synthesis of that period. Numerical majority and physical might are not the sole prerequisites for the emergence of an antithesis. If the oppressed are an intellectual group, then no matter how few their numbers, they can put up an antithesis. As soon as the antithesis is created the former ideology ceases to be a synthesis. It becomes the thesis in the next phase. So, in the second phase, an antithesis will again emerge against that very thesis. In this phase, as long as a synthesis does not emerge, unabated struggle will continue. Theoretically, synthesis is not the absolute factor, the final clash or the last word, for thesis, antithesis and synthesis take place within the bounds of relativity.
According to PROUT, changes take place in a cyclic order. In some era of the past the toiling masses were dominant. At that time there was no human society or civilization, and even the concept of the family was almost non-existent. Such a period was called the Shúdra era. After this Shúdra era came the Kśatriya era, or the age of the warriors. As a result of clash and cohesion, the dawn of the Vipra era became discernible on the horizon of the social cycle. When the warriors, those with Herculean strength, started ignoring and hurting the sentiments of the Vipras or intellectuals, the Vipras evolved an antithesis against the thesis of the Kśatriya era out of vindictiveness and revenge. But the saga of exploitation and suffering knew no end. When the Vipras started an offensive against the bourgeois class, the dissatisfied and disgruntled bourgeoisie launched a crusade against the thesis of the Vipra age. When the once disgruntled classes began to engage in exploitation, profiteering and black marketeering, thriving off the life blood of others, then the exploited, oppressed and rebellious people started a bloody revolution for the destruction of the bourgeois class.
Such movement of the social cycle will never cease, will never stop. Sadvipras or spiritual revolutionaries will inspire and mobilize the crusading human spirit against barbarity, injustice and rapacity and help accelerate the speed of antithetical social movement. Afterwards, during the stage of synthesis, they will take the leadership of society into their own hands. If proper adjustments are maintained with time, space and person, the Sadvipra inspired synthetic age will be permanent. In a society governed and administered by these Sadvipras, the synthetic structure of society will remain intact, although different eras may come and go. The Shúdra era will come but there will be no exploitation by the Shúdras. The Kśatriya era will come, but exploitation by the Kśatriyas will not be possible because of the synthetic order prevailing in society.
Only Sadvipras can constantly maintain proper adjustment with time, space and person. Those who propagate materialist philosophies, but are are morally and spiritually conscious, are quite incapable of constantly maintaining such proper adjustments, for all changes take place within the purview of relativity. Those who have accepted the Supreme Entity as their goal – those who really believe in universal humanism and reflect universalism in the fullest measure – are alone capable of constantly maintaining proper adjustment, for under the influence of a spiritual ideal their temperaments become great and benevolent. Due to their benevolent idealism and mental development they naturally look upon all with love and affection. They can never do any injustice in any particular era or to an particular individual. Sadvipra society is both the aspiration and demand of oppressed humanity; dialectical materialism is fundamentally wrong and defective.
In all countries and at all times, Sadvipras must wait until the emergence of an antithesis against any particular thesis. So long as an antithesis has not evolved, Sadvipras will go on working throughout the world to bring about the psychological background for the antithesis of the next phase. The moment the auspicious dawn of renaissance or synthesis comes, Sadvipras will take the reins of the leadership of society into their own hands.
The welfare of society is not possible through dialectical materialism. Dialectical materialism may be suitable and appropriate for the well-being of human society in a certain age, but in the very next era it may prove to be a brutal instrument of exploitation and destruction. Prout is the only solution, for it recognizes and accepts the necessity of changes in time, space and person. It will go on constantly maintaining ratio. The policies and programmes of Prout formulated for a particular era, for a particular place and for particular people will not remain fixed in new conditions and will adjust with changes in time, space and person. Such are the fundamental principles advocated by Prout. Thus, dialectical materialism cannot do any good for human society and may only have some use for a particular era, time or person.
Let us now discuss democracy. It is claimed that democracy is government of the people, by the people and for the people. After the Shúdra era power passed into the hands of tribal chiefs. In the course of time clan leaders became feudal kings. The theory of democracy was born out of feelings of revolt against the tyranny of the monarchy exercised by these feudal kings. The history of democracy is very ancient. History teaches us that it originated during the reign of the Licchavii Dynasty in ancient India. Being so ancient, it is not surprising that democracy has some defects.

Let us now analyse the assertion, “Democracy is government by the people”. In a democracy, do people have the requisite education and consciousness to judge what is right or what is wrong, what they should do or what they should not do? Does the power of understanding and judgement come as soon as one attains a prescribed age? Is age the yardstick of wisdom and education? Alas, this happens to be the accepted fact! If those who talk big about the democratic system read the history of the Licchavii Royal Dynasty they would learn that in those days not everyone had voting rights. Only the Licchavii leaders, not the people in general, could exercise and enjoy adult franchise.
Democracy can only be effective and fruitful where there is no kind of exploitation. Every person has certain minimum requirements in life which must be guaranteed. There may be a little adjustment in these minimum requirements as per differences in time, space and person. The people of Kashmir may need a great quantity of warm clothing. Therefore, they should be provided with more woollen clothes than the people of Bihar. The minimum requirements vary with the change of era and time. In ancient times, people were satisfied with a dhoti, a shirt and a pair of wooden sandals. Not only that, they did not even feel the need for shoes. But today a suit is an absolute necessity. In olden days people would travel long distances on foot, but today a cycle or motor car has become essential.
Minimum necessities must be provided to every individual. There is no limit to these minimum requirements. Every progressive society should bear in mind that the minimum requirements will go on increasing day by day. In the not too distant future a day will come when every individual will acquire a rocket. Then, for example, it will be very common for one’s father’s house to be on this planet and one’s father-in-law’s house to be on Venus.

The social system that will come into being, keeping parallelism and harmony with time, space and person, will be called progressive socialism. Our Prout is that very progressive socialism. Society will have to make provisions to ensure an increase in the living standard of every individual. When progressive socialism is established within the framework of democracy, then democracy will be successful. Otherwise, government of the people, by the people and for the people will only mean government of fools, by fools and for fools.
Mass education is one of the basic necessities for the successful and effective running of democracy. In some cases even educated people unjustly abuse their voting rights. People cast their votes at the insistence and inducement of misguided local leaders. To approach a polling booth like a herd of cattle to cast votes in ballot boxes is meaningless. Is this not a farce in the name of democracy? Thus, the spread of education and proper knowledge is essential. Education does not only means literacy or alphabetical knowledge. In my opinion, real education means proper, adequate knowledge and the power of understanding. In other words, education should impart an awareness of who I am and what I ought to do. Full knowledge about these things is what education means. Merely having some acquaintance with the alphabet is no education.

Literacy certainly serves some purpose. I am not saying that literacy is absolutely useless and lifeless. There are some countries in South America where only literate people enjoy franchise. Political parties in these countries launch literacy campaigns and people naturally cast their votes in favour of those parties which have made them literate. Thus, the government remains free from all responsibilities and expenditures in this regard. But this system cannot serve its full intended purpose. First, it is not reasonable to think that mere literacy will awaken full wisdom about what to do and what not to do. Second, if the responsibility of literacy is left to political parties, then those political parties will spread their respective party propaganda popularizing themselves among the people. People will become intellectually bankrupt, and this curse will undermine their rational judgement and discrimination. Nevertheless, education is of prime importance. Without education democracy can never be successful.
Morality is the second fundamental factor for the success of democracy. People sell their votes because they lack morality. There are some countries in the world where votes are bought and sold. Can we call it democracy? Is it not a farce? Democracy cannot succeed unless 51% of the population rigidly follow principles of morality. Where corrupt and immoral persons are in the majority, leaders will inevitably be elected among these immoral people.

Today there are too many obstacles on the path of morality. Urban civilization is one of the chief reasons of moral degeneration because many people are compelled to live undesirably in small, congested places. This is inimical to morality in individual life. Solitary living for some time is essential for the cultivation and development of morality. Where the population is very dense, milk and vegetables are in short supply, and these are indispensable for healthy survival. When the demand is more than the supply, adulteration goes unchecked. To meet the deficit in the supply of milk, people mix water with it. To meet the demand for diamonds, imitation diamonds are produced, because the demand is more than the supply. Cities become dens of corruption because of antisocial elements, but generally such things are not noticeable in villages. In villages everybody knows everyone else. Everybody knows the livelihood of their neighbours. But even after twenty years of living in a city people seldom get acquainted with their neighbours. They don’t even know that there are many swindlers lurking in their midst. However, the slogan, “Go back to the village” alone will not suffice. City life has a great attraction for people generally so they run to cities for their livelihood. To stop this trend intellectuals and others will have to look for their livelihood in villages. The supply of cheap electricity and the expansion of cottage industries in villages are of paramount necessity today. By cottage industries I do not mean outdated, primitive handicrafts. Cottage industries must be efficient, modern mechanized units. From the economic viewpoint decentralization is an absolute necessity. With the exception of heavy industries and essential government offices, all industry should be shifted to the vil lages. To stop overcrowding in the cities this is the only feasible approach. Villages are not congested, so antisocial people will not be able to hide themselves there. If they try, the police can easily detect them.

In a democratic society immorality is a big issue which cannot be avoided. Some people say that if mustard seeds are sprinkled over any person possessed by a ghost, the ghost takes to its heels. But if the ghost hides in the mustard seeds themselves, then of course there is not the ghost of a chance of escape from the ghost. Similarly, the ghost of immorality lies hidden in today’s democratic system. Democracy induces sentiments like provincialism, communalism, casteism, etc., which are devoid of morality. Suppose that in a certain constituency person A represents a majority community, but B, C, and D are capable and competent representatives. In such circumstances, representative A is sure to fully exploit the majority community by kindling casteism or narrow-minded communal sentiments in order to win elections. Such antisocial activities create suspicion in people’s minds and thus deal a staggering blow to their morality. In some democratic systems social discrimination becomes so rampant that different groups and parties find ample scope to propagate and disseminate their defective ideas and fissiparous sentiments. So we see that morality, which should be the basic factor of democracy’s victorious march, goes unprotected. Thus in a democracy some people indulge in casteism and extract maximum advantage from it. Political parties also nominate those persons who belong to majority communities as their representatives. The masses, being uneducated, cannot see through these games.
Thirdly, social, economic and political consciousness is also indispensable for the success of democracy. Even educated people may be misguided by shrewd and cunning politicians if they are not sufficiently conversant with social, economic and political issues. Democracy can be successful only when people imbibe these three kinds of consciousness. Without this awareness, the welfare of the society is not possible either in theory or in practice. Intellectuals, therefore, must never encourage unrealistic ideas of this sort.

But even if these three requirements for the success of democracy are met, the real welfare of the society is not possible by dialectical materialism or by democracy. The only solution is an enlightened, benevolent dictatorship – that is a morally and spiritually conscious dictatorship. Moralists, though in a minority today, have no reason to worry. Once society is led by people who are intellectually and intuitionally developed, there will certainly be no scope for exploitation and injustice. Now a question may arise. If in a nation or country every person enjoys human rights, why should a particular person have voting rights while others do not? After all, this world is the common inheritance of all, and every human being has the right to enjoy and utilize all mundane, supramundane and spiritual resources. But just because everybody has the individual right to enjoy everything, it does not follow that everybody has the individual right to run the administration of a country. For the good and the welfare of the people in general, it is not fitting to leave the onus of the administration in the hands of all. Suppose a certain couple have five children. All of them are happy and comfortable in the family. But if the children, on the plea of being in the majority, suddenly claim full authority and the right of the management of the family, is it feasible? Say they call a meeting and pass a resolution that all the glasses and crockery should be smashed. Can we call it a wise resolution? Let me give you another example. Students compared to teachers are always in the majority. Now if the students, on the plea of being in the majority, put up the demand that they them selves should set the examination and be the examiners, can that demand be granted? So you see, democracy is not a very good or simple system. But unless an alternative, better and more agreeable theory or system is evolved, we will have to accept democracy in preference to other systems, and make use of it for the time being.

