n Festivals
While moving forward and working in individual life, people sometimes become tired; this happens to everyone. Even the women of the house while working continuously sometimes complain of their daily drudgery. “We can no longer tolerate this monotony.” Those who are employed in factories also say, “We cannot bear this drab and dull existence any longer.” Every day they come and go in the same boring way, and because of this continuous monotony, people lose all interest in life. They become totally dissatisfied with the world, and their minds become assailed with cynicism. At that time some one should say, “Why do you worry? You should not be anxious or dejected – you must not feel sick at heart. You have your physical strength, you have your hands and feet to work and walk, you have your intelligence. If necessary you should take rest for a while. There is no reason to become frustrated in life.”
Mere movement is not the only characteristic of life; the second characteristic is buoyancy of spirit. Not only should people move, but they should also move in such a way that shows they are full of vitality, so that the throbbing pulse of their lives will be a source of inspiration to others. This is the true characteristic of life. Human beings always need inspiration from their fellow humans. Thus one should say to others, “Why do you waste your time in idle pursuits? You should throw yourself into a maelstrom of activities. Why do you worry about the success or failure of your work? If you fail, I am there to help you, I am with you. You needn’t worry in the least.” Those sick and disappointed people should be exhorted with these sorts of inspiring words.
This dejected situation occurs not only in the lives of individuals but in collective life as well. Perhaps a particular community performed marvellous feats in a particular century, giving ample proof of its vitality and receiving the applause of all. But thereafter followed a century of stagnancy; after a period of extreme over-exertion, the people suddenly became totally silent. When a newborn calf first sees the light of day, it becomes utterly confused and merely runs about aimlessly. Then all at once it becomes motionless and starts to suck its mother’s udder. After a few days it starts eating grass and stops running about altogether.
Human life should not be like this; it should be full of dynamism from start to finish. If it fails in this, it will cease to be human life in the true sense of the term.
Just as people psychologically do not like to move, similarly they do not want to be cast aside either; no one wants to become a thing of the past. Those who are still employed start thinking before their retirement, “Now I shall be cast aside in the world, as I will be unfit for any worldly activity.” While thinking thus, they feel very unhappy. Males after retirement try to keep themselves engaged in this or that work, but this women often cannot do – they merely remain in the house doing nothing. What a pitiable condition! It is a peculiar situation, and it develops a tragic psychology. If you call a person an old man, he will not react sharply, but if you call a woman an old woman, she will be extremely angry. Thus women always pretend they are younger in age than they actually are, for no one wants to lose the essence of their life.

In collective life as well, a particular community may demonstrate its efficiency for a while, and in that community many great persons may be born. But thereafter, everything comes to a standstill. With the noise of a bustling wind, people reminisce, “Oh, my grandfather accomplished this great feat… my aunt performed that marvellous work… our surname is Roychoudhury. For we were once great landlords…” Thus people always ruminate over their past and gloat over their ancestors, because they have no glorious present at all – everything is an empty void. When a community thus loses its inner wealth, then it tenaciously clings to the skeleton of its past and says, “I was this, I was that.” But they are unable to say, “I am this, I am that.” I hope you realize the significance of this.
Now, what is essential in such a circumstance? One must say, “Do not bother about what your ancestors have done. Why can’t you do the same? The same warm blood is flowing through your veins as flowed in theirs.”
Amra ghucába má tor kálimá
Mánuś ámrá, nahi to meś;
Devii ámár, sádhaná ámár,
Svarga ámár, ámár desh.

[Oh motherland, we will remove all your stains, for we are human beings, not sheep. You are my goddess, You are my sádhaná, you are my heaven, you are my hallowed land.]

The poet Diijendralal Roy said, “We have done many things in the past, but now we can do nothing. We have lost our glory, we need not be anxious. The stains of our inglorious life of today will certainly be removed, for we are human beings, not sheep.” Thus when any community is caught in a muddy whirlpool, then someone must come and declare in a thundering voice, “Do not be alarmed. There is no reason to think that those who had a glorious past will not have a glorious future as well.”

Uttiśt́hata jágrata prápya barán nibodhata: “Arise, awake awake and learn from a competent teacher, and then start to work.” Just as the guidance of an inspiring person is necessary in individual life, similarly in collective life also there should be someone to give a clarion call to action. When collective life becomes dejected, then a divine personality is necessary to galvanize people into action. Some means must be found for people to cast off their lethargy and start life anew.

People often feel bored with their humdrum lives, with their mechanical routines; thus a fresh start must be created through [[utsava [festivals]. In the Sanskrit language the meaning of the word sava is “to take birth”; the root verb sú plus al suffix equals sava, and su means “to take birth”.]] The substance which [[makes one feel that one’s body has been reborn]] is called ásava [an alcoholic drink thought to have energizing properties]. Similarly ut – sú + al = utsava [which means “festival”]. “Ut” means “above” and “sava” means “[[to take]] birth”; so utsava means “an occasion which gives human beings fresh inspiration to live a new life.”

When people become tired and uninspired, when they can no longer look towards the future with hope, when their colourful dreams are shattered, at that time the sweetness of a festival brings new joy and vigour in life. Thus in individual and collective life, the importance of festivals is tremendous. One should always remember that festivals should be such that all can take part in them without any ostentatious display of wealth, and with an upsurge of their life force. And these festivals should be conducted in such a way that people take part in them from a spontaneous inner urge. I hope that you will make such arrangements so that all are attracted towards your festivals which will be more and more charming – and this will bring about your collective welfare.
