---
heading: Part 3
title: Filipinas Dentro De Cien Años
description: Las Filipinas, si han de continuar bajo el dominio de España, tienen por fuerza que tranformarse en sentido político, por exigirlo así la marcha de su historia y las necesidades de sus habitantes
date: 2022-02-10
image: /covers/dentro.jpg
# image: https://qph.fs.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-a53c2a32fd3cf1accd44a91a0ae1a149-mzj
author: Jose Rizal
icon: /icons/sun.png
---


La Solaridad; núm. 18: Barcelona, 31 octubre 1889. 

## 3

The Philippines, if they are to continue under the domination of Spain, necessarily have to transform themselves in a political sense, as the course of their history and the needs of their inhabitants so demand. We demonstrated this in the previous article. This transformation, we also said, must be violent and fatal, if it starts from the spheres of the people; peaceful and fruitful in results, if of the superior classes.

Some rulers have guessed this truth, and driven by their patriotism, try to propose reforms that we need to prevent events. Up to the present, notwithstanding how many have been dictated, they have produced scant results, both for the Government and for the country, sometimes damaging even those that only promised happy success. And it is that it is built on land without consistency.

We said, and we will repeat it once more, and we will repeat it always: all the reforms that have a palliative character are, not only useless, but even harmful, when the Government is faced with evils that must be radically remedied. And if we were not convinced of the honesty and rectitude of certain governments, we would be tempted to say that all these partial reforms were only plasters and ointments from a doctor who, not knowing how to cure a cancer, or not daring to remove it, wants to that way distract the sufferings of the patient, or temporize with the pusillanimity of the timid and ignorant.

All the reforms of our liberal ministers were, were, are and will be good... if they were carried out. When we think of them, we are reminded of the dietary regimen of Sancho Panza on the Insula Barataria. He sat at a sumptuous and well-appointed table "full of fruit and a great diversity of dishes of various delicacies"; but the doctor Pedro Rezio interposed his rod between the mouth of the unhappy man and each plate, saying: absit!, and they removed the delicacy, leaving Sancho hungrier than ever. It is true that the despotic Pedro Rezio gave reasons that seem to have been written by Cervantes for the Overseas Governments:—"You must not eat, Mr. Governor, but as is the custom and custom in the other islands where there are governors", etc. —finding inconveniences in all the dishes, some because they are hot, others because they are wet, etc., entirely like our Pedros Rezios from across the seas.

Damn the good that the art of his cook did Sancho! In the case of our country, the reforms play the role of delicacies; Philippines that of Sancho, and that of the charlatan doctor, are performed by many people, interested in not touching the dishes, perhaps to take advantage of them. It turns out that the patient Sancho, or the Philippines, misses his freedom, denying all governments, and ends up rebelling against his so-called doctor. In the same way, as long as the Philippines does not have a free press, does not have a voice in the Chambers to let the Government and the Nation know whether or not its decrees are duly complied with, whether or not they take advantage of the country, all the abilities of the Overseas Minister will have the fate of the dishes of the Ínsula Barataria. The minister, then, who wants his reforms to be reforms, must begin by declaring the press free in the Philippines, and by creating Filipino deputies.

The free press in the Philippines, because complaints from there rarely reach the Peninsula, very rarely, and if they do, they are so hidden, so mysterious, that no newspaper dares to reproduce them; and if they reproduce, they reproduce late and poorly. A government that administers a country from far away is the one that most needs a free press, even more than the one that governs in the metropolis, if it wants to do it straight and decently. The government that governs the country can still do without the press (if it can), because it is on the ground, because it has eyes and ears, and because it closely observes what it governs and administers. But the Government that governs from afar absolutely needs the truth and the facts to come to its knowledge through all possible channels, so that it can better judge and appreciate them, and this need is even more pronounced when it comes to a country like the Philippines, whose inhabitants speak and complain in a language unknown to the authorities.



To govern in another way will also be called to govern, since it is necessary to give it a name, but it is to govern badly. It is to judge hearing only one of the parties; It is directing a ship without taking into account its conditions, the state of the sea, the reefs, the lows, the course of the wind, the currents, etc. It's managing a house thinking only of polishing and money, without seeing what's in the box, without thinking about the servers and the family.

But routine is a slope where many governments walk, and routine says that freedom of the press is a danger. Let's see what history says. Uprisings and revolutions have always taken place in tyrannized countries, in those where human thought and heart have been forced to silence.

If the great Napoleon had not tyrannized the press, perhaps she would have warned him of the danger into which he was falling, and would have made him understand that the peoples were tired and the land needed peace; perhaps his genius, instead of wasting itself in external aggrandizement, folding in on itself, would have worked for its consolidation and would have been consolidated. Spain itself records more revolutions in its history when the press was muzzled. What colony has become independent having a free press, enjoying freedoms? Is it preferable to govern blindly, or to govern knowingly?

Some will answer us, alleging that in the colonies with the free press the PRESTIGE of the rulers would be in great danger, that column of false governments. We will answer that the prestige of the Nation is preferable to that of several individuals. A nation gains respect not by supporting or covering up abuses, but by punishing and condemning them. Besides, what Napoleon said about great men and his valets succeeds to this prestige. We, who suffer and know all the falsehoods and humiliations of those alleged gods, do not need the free press to know them; They have long been in disrepute. The free press is needed by the Government, the Government, which still dreams of prestige, which builds on mined land. We say the same about the Filipino deputies.

What dangers does the government see in them? One of three things: either they come out unruly, pastry chefs, or they come out as they should be. Assuming that we fall into the most absurd pessimism and admit the insult, great for the Philippines, but even greater for Spain, that all the deputies were separatists, and that in all their proposals they maintained filibustering ideas, isn't the majority there, Spanish and patriot, is not there the clairvoyance of the rulers to oppose their ends and fight them?

And wouldn't this be worth more than the discontent that ferments and spreads in the secret of the home, in the huts and in the fields? It is true that the Spanish people never spare their blood when it comes to patriotism; but would not the struggle of principles in Parliament be more preferable than the exchange of bullets in swampy terrain, 3,000 leagues from the country, among impenetrable forests, under a burning sun or in torrential rains?





These peaceful struggles of ideas, in addition to being a thermometer for the Government, have the advantage of being cheaper and more glorious, because the Spanish Parliament abounds precisely in champions of the word, invincible in the field of speeches. In addition, they say that the Filipinos are indolent and modest; what, then, can the Government fear? Doesn't it influence the elections? Frankly; it is doing great honor to the filibusters to be afraid of them in the midst of the Courts of the Nation.

If pastry chefs come out, as is to be expected and probably will be, all the better for the government, and all the worse for its constituents. They are a few more votes in favor, and the Government will be able to laugh freely at the filibusters, if there are any. If they come out as they should be, worthy, honorable and faithful to their missions, they will undoubtedly annoy the ignorant or incapable minister with their questions, but they will help him govern and they will be some more honorable people among the representatives of the Nation.

However; If the true inconvenience of the Filipino deputies consists in the smell of Igorots that made him so uneasy in the Senate, the seasoned General Mr. Salamanca, Mr. D. Sinibaldo de Mas, who has seen the Igorots up close and wanted to Living with them, you can say that they will smell, at worst, like gunpowder, and Mr. Salamanca, without a doubt, is not afraid of that smell. And if it were not more than this, the Filipinos, who back in their country have the custom of bathing every day, once they are deputies, they will be able to leave such a dirty custom, at least during the legislative period, so as not to bother with the smell from the bathroom the delicate smells of the Salamancas. Useless to refute certain inconveniences of some pretty writers, about the skins more or less brown, and the faces more or less proboscis.

In terms of aesthetics, each race has its own. China, for example, which has 414 million inhabitants and has a very ancient civilization, finds all Europeans ugly, calling them Fan-Kwai, that is, red devils. His aesthetic has 100 million more supporters than the European aesthetic. Furthermore, if that is what it is about, we would have to accept the inferiority of the Latins, especially that of the Spaniards, with respect to the Saxons, who are much whiter.

And as long as it is not said that the Spanish Chamber is a meeting of Adoises, Antinoos, boys and other similar angels; As long as you go there to legislate and not to socratize or wander through imaginary hemispheres, we believe that the Government should not stop in the face of these inconveniences. The Law has no skin, nor reason noses. We do not see, therefore, any serious cause for the Philippines not to have representatives. With its creation, many discontents are silenced, and instead of blaming the country for its ills on the Government, as is happening now, it will cope with them better, because at least it can complain, and because, having its children among its legislators, it acts in a certain way in solidarity Of their acts. We do not know if we are serving the true interests of our country well by asking for deputies. We know that the lack of enlightenment, the timidity, the selfishness of many of our compatriots, and the audacity, cunning, and powerful means of those who want obscurantism there, can turn reform into a harmful instrument.

But we want to be loyal to the Government and we indicate the path that seems best to us so that its efforts are not wasted, so that the discontents disappear. If after such a fair and necessary measure has been proposed, the Filipino people are so foolish and cowardly that they betray their true interests, then let the responsibilities fall on them, let them suffer all the consequences. Every country gets the luck it deserves, and the government will be able to say that it has done its duty. These are the two fundamental reforms that, well interpreted and applied, will be able to dissipate all the clouds, affirm the affection for Spain and make all subsequent ones bear fruit.


These are the sine quibus non reforms. The fear that independence will come through them is childish: the free press will let the government know the beats of opinion, and the deputies, if they are the best among the sons of the Philippines, as they should be, will be their hostages. There being no reason for discontent, what will be the attempt to excite the masses of the people? Equally unacceptable is the inconvenience that others allege about the faulty culture of the majority of the inhabitants. In addition to the fact that it is not as defective as it is claimed, there is no plausible reason why the ignorant and helpless (through their own fault or someone else's), be denied their representative to watch over them so that they do not run over them.

He is the one who needs it most. No one ceases to be a man, no one loses his rights to civilization just because he is more or less uneducated, and since the Filipino is considered a capable citizen when his contribution and his blood are asked to defend the homeland, why should he be denied that capacity when it comes to granting him a right?

Furthermore, why should he be responsible for his ignorance, if it is confessed by everyone, friends and enemies, that his eagerness to learn is so great, that even before the Spaniards arrived, everyone knew how to read and write, and that as we see now, the most modest families make enormous sacrifices so that their children can learn a little, even serving as servants to learn Spanish?

How can we expect the country to be enlightened in the current state, if we see that how many decrees the Government launches in favor of instruction, are met by Pedros Rezios who prevent their fulfillment, because they have in their hands what they call teaching? If the Filipino, then, is intelligent enough to contribute, he must also be intelligent enough to choose and have someone who watches over him and his interests, with the product of which he serves the Government of his Nation.

To reason in another way is to reason like a funnel. Once the laws and the acts of the authorities are supervised, the word Justice can begin to cease to be a colonial irony. What makes the English most respectable in their possessions is their strict and expeditious justice, in such a way that the inhabitants place all their trust in the judges. Justice is the first virtue of the civilizing races.

She subdues the most barbarous nations; injustice revolts the weakest. The posts and charges were to be given by opposition, the works and trials being published so that there would be encouragement and discontent would not arise. Thus, if the Indian does not shake his indolence, he will not be able to murmur if he sees all the positions carried out by castilas. We assume that it will not be the Spaniards who are afraid to enter this fight: this way they will be able to prove their superiority by the superiority of their intelligence. And although this is not customary in the Metropolis, it must be practiced in the colonies, since true prestige must be sought through moral qualities, because the colonizers must be or appear to be, at least, just, intelligent and upright, like the man feigns virtue when in contact with strangers.

The posts and positions thus won naturally reject arbitrary dismissal and create employees and rulers who are capable and knowledgeable about their duties. The positions held by the Indians, instead of endangering Spanish domination, would only serve to strengthen it; for what interest would they have in changing what is safe and stable against what is uncertain and problematic? The Indian, furthermore, is very fond of quietude and prefers a modest present to a brilliant future.



Tell those various Filipino officials who are still in office: they are the most inert conservatives. We could add other detailed reforms concerning commerce, agriculture, security of the individual, property, education, etc.; but these are issues that we will deal with separately in other articles. For now we are content with the schemes, let no one say that we ask too much.

There will be no lack of spirits who brand us as utopian: but what is utopia? Utopia was a country that Thomas More imagined, where there was universal suffrage, religious tolerance, almost complete abolition of the death penalty, etc.

When the little novel was published, these things were considered as dreams, impossible, that is, utopian. And yet, civilization has left the country of Utopia far behind: the human will and conscience have performed more miracles, they have abolished slaves, and the death penalty for adultery, things impossible even for Utopia itself! The French colonies have their representatives; In the English Chambers, attempts have also been made to give representation to the Crown colonies, since the others already enjoy a certain autonomy; the press, there, is also free; only in Spain, which in the 16th century was the model nation in colonization, is it far behind.

Cuba and Puerto Rico, whose inhabitants do not reach a third of that of the Philippines, and which have not made the sacrifices for Spain that the latter, have numerous deputies.

From its first days, the Philippines had its own, who dealt with the Kings and the Pope of the needs of the country; it had them in the critical moments of Spain, when it was groaning under the Napoleonic yoke, and they did not take advantage of the misfortune of the Metropolis like other colonies, but rather tightened the ties that united them to the Nation, giving proof of their loyalty; continued until many years later...

What crime have the Islands committed so that they are thus deprived of their rights? In short: the Philippines will continue to be Spanish, if they enter the path of legal and civilized life, if the rights of its inhabitants are respected, if they are granted the others that are owed to them, if the liberal policy of the Governments is carried out carried out without obstacles or pettiness, without subterfuge or false interpretations. Otherwise, if you want to see in the Islands a vein to be exploited, a resource to satisfy ambitions, to free the Metropolis from taxes, draining the goose that lays the golden eggs and closing its ears to all the cries of reason, then However great the fidelity of the Filipinos, they will not be able to prevent the fatal laws of History from being fulfilled.


The colonies founded to serve the politics or commerce of a metropolis all end up becoming independent, said Bachelet; Before Bachelet said it, all the Phoenician, Carthaginian, Greek, Roman, English, Portuguese and Spanish colonies had already said it. Close without a doubt are the ties that unite us to Spain; Two peoples do not live three centuries in continuous contact, participating in the same fate, shedding their blood in the same fields, believing the same beliefs, adoring the same God, communicating the same thoughts, without stronger ties being born between them than those that they impose weapons or fear: sacrifices and benefits on the part of one and the other have given birth to affections;

Machiavelli, the great connoisseur of the human heart, used to say: la natura degli huomini, é cosí obligarsi per li beneficii che essi fanno, come per quelli che essi ricevono (the human condition is to bind oneself both for the benefits that are made and for those that are received ); all this and even more is true; but it is pure sentimentality, and in the bitter field of politics, hard necessity and interests prevail. No matter how much the Filipinos owe to Spain, they cannot be required to renounce their redemption, that the liberal and enlightened wander like exiles from the homeland, that the grossest aspirations be drowned in its atmosphere, that the peaceful inhabitant live continuously capsizing, depending the fate of the towns on the whims of a single man; Spain cannot pretend, not even in the name of God himself, that six million men be brutalized, exploited and oppressed, be denied light, the innate rights in the human being, and then be filled with é abuse; no, there is no gratitude that can excuse, there is not enough gunpowder in the world that can justify the attacks against the freedom of the individual, against the sacredness of the home, against the laws, against peace and honor; attacks that are committed there every day; there is no Divinity that can proclaim the sacrifice of our most expensive affections, that of the family, the sacrileges and violations that are committed by those who have the name of God on their lips; no one can demand of the Filipino people the impossible; the noble Spanish people, so fond of their liberties and rights, cannot tell him to renounce his own; The people who take pleasure in the glories of their past cannot ask another, educated by him, to accept abjection and dishonor his name! Those of us who today fight in the legal and peaceful field of discussions, understand it this way, and with our eyes fixed on our ideals, we will not cease to advocate for our cause, without going beyond the limits of the legal; but if before violence silences us or we have the misfortune to fall (which is possible, since we are not immortal), then we do not know what path will be taken by the numerous offshoots and of better sap that will rush to occupy the positions that we leave empty. If what we want doesn't come true...

In the face of the unfortunate eventuality, it is necessary that horror does not frighten us, that instead of closing our eyes, we look face to face at what the future may bring. And to that end, after throwing the handful of earth that is tributed to the Cerberos, let us frankly enter the abyss to fathom its terrible mysteries. the Solidarity; no. 21: Madrid, December 15, 1889. IV. History does not record in its annals any lasting domination exercised by one people over another, of different races, of strange uses and customs, and of opposing or divergent ideals. One of the two has had to give in and succumb; Either the foreigner was expelled, as happened to the Carthaginians, the Arabs, and the French in Spain, or the indigenous people had to succumb, or withdraw, as was the case with the inhabitants of the new Continent, Australia, New Zealand, etc. One of the longest dominations was that of the Arabs in Spain, which lasted seven centuries. But, in spite of the conquering people living in the middle of the conquered country; in spite of the fragmentation of the small states of the Peninsula that arose little by little, like small islands in the midst of the great Saracen flood; Despite the chivalrous spirit, bravery and religious tolerance of the caliphs, they were finally expelled after bloody and tenacious struggles that formed the Spanish Homeland and created Spain in the 15th and 16th century.


It is against all natural and moral laws the existence of a foreign body inside another endowed with force and activity. Science teaches us that it is assimilated, destroys the organism, is eliminated or encysted. The entrenchment of a conquering people is impossible, since it means complete isolation, absolute inertia, adynamia of the winning element. Encystment here means the tomb of the foreign invader. Well then: applying these considerations to the Philippines, we must necessarily conclude, as a deduction from all that we have been saying, that if its population is not assimilated to the Spanish homeland, if the rulers do not appropriate the spirit of its inhabitants, if laws Equitable and frank and liberal reforms do not make one and the other forget that they are of different races, or if both peoples do not merge to constitute a socially and politically homogeneous mass that is not worked by opposing tendencies and antagonistic thoughts and interests, the Philippines will one fatal day declare itself infallibly independent. Against this law of destiny, neither Spanish patriotism, nor the clamor of all the tyrants of Ultramar, nor the love of all Filipinos for Spain, nor the doubtful future of the dismemberment and internecine struggles of the islands can be opposed. Necessity is the strongest divinity the world knows, and necessity is the result of physical laws set in motion by moral forces. We said, and statistics prove it, that it is impossible to destroy the Filipino race. And even if it were possible, what interest would Spain have in destroying the inhabitants of a land that she cannot populate or cultivate, whose climate is to a certain extent disastrous? What good would the Philippines be without the Filipinos?



Yes, precisely, given its system of colonization and the transitory character of the peninsulars who go to Overseas, a colony is all the more useful and productive the more inhabitants and wealth it possesses. Moreover, that in order to destroy the six million Malays, even assuming that they are in their infancy and that they will never learn to fight and defend themselves, it is necessary for Spain to sacrifice at least a quarter of its population. We remind the supporters of colonial exploitation of this. But none of this can happen. What is imminent is that, if Spain denies the education and freedoms necessary for human life to the Filipinos, they will seek their education abroad, behind the backs of the mother country, and will procure certain comforts in one way or another. in his country. Result: that the resistance of short-sighted and rickety politicians is not only useless, but harmful, because what could be a reason for gratitude and love, turns into resentment and hatred. Hatred and resentment on the one hand, suspicion and anger on the other, will finally end in a violent and terrible clash; especially when there are elements interested in disturbing the order to catch something in the dark, to demonstrate their valuable power, to launch lamentations, recriminate or activate violent measures, etc. It is to be hoped that the Government emerges triumphant, and generally (and it is customary) it goes to extremes in punishment, either to give a terrible lesson to show off its severity, or also to avenge the vanquished for the moments of terror and anxiety that danger made him pass. An unavoidable accessory to these catastrophes is the accumulation of injustices committed against innocent or peaceful inhabitants. The private revenges, the denunciations, the infamous accusations, the resentments, the greed of the property of others, the opportune moment for a slander, the haste and the expeditious procedures of the military courts, the pretext of the integrity of the Homeland and of reason of State that covers and pays for everything, even for scrupulous consciences, which are now unfortunately rare, and above all the savage fear, the cowardice that feeds on the vanquished, all these things increase the rigors and the number of victims . It turns out that a stream of blood now stands between the two towns; that the wounded and resentful, instead of diminishing, increase, because to the families and friends of the guilty, who always believe the punishment is excessive and the judge unjust, we must add the families and friends of the innocent who see no advantage in live and act submissively and peacefully.



Consider further that if strict measures are already dangerous in the midst of a nation made up of a homogeneous population, the danger is multiplied a hundredfold when the Government forms a race different from that of the governed. In the first, an injustice can still be attributed to a single man, to the ruler moved by private passions, and once the tyrant is dead, the offended party is reconciled with the Government of his nation. But in countries dominated by a foreign race, the most just act of severity is interpreted as injustice and oppression, as dictated by a strange person who has no sympathy or who is an enemy of the country; and the offense not only offends the offended party, but his entire race, because it is not usually considered personal, and the resentment naturally extends to the entire ruling race and does not die with the offender. Hence the immense prudence and exquisite tact that should adorn the colonizing countries; and the fact of considering the Government of the colonies in general, and our Ministry of Overseas in particular, as schools of learning, contributes notably to the fulfillment of the great law that the colonies declare themselves independent more or less late. Thus, down that slope, the towns fall; As they bathe in blood and soak themselves in gall and tears, the colony, if it has vitality, learns to fight and perfect itself in combat, while the mother country, whose life in the colony depends on peace and submission of the subjects, he weakens each time, and although he makes heroic efforts, in the end, as his number is less, and he only has a fictitious life, he ends up dying. He is like a rich sybarite who, accustomed to being served by numerous servants who work and sow for him, the day his slaves deny him obedience, since he does not live by himself, he has to die. Vengeance, injustice and suspicion on the one hand, and on the other the feeling of homeland and freedom that will be awakened in these continuous struggles, insurrections and uprisings, will end up generalizing the movement and one of the two peoples will have to succumb. . The laxity will be short, since it will be equivalent to a slavery much crueler than death for the people, and to a dishonorable loss of prestige for the ruler. One of the towns has to succumb. Spain, because of the number of its inhabitants, because of the state of its army and navy, because of the distance to which the islands are located, because of the little knowledge it has of them, and because of fighting against a population whose love and will have been alienated , he will necessarily have to give up, if he does not want to risk, not only his other possessions and his future in Africa, but also his very independence in Europe. All this at the cost of much blood, many crimes, after deadly fights, murders, fires, executions, hunger, misery, etc., etc. The Spaniard is brave and patriotic, and he sacrifices everything, in favorable moments, for the good of the Homeland: he has the courage and decision of his bull; The Filipino loves his own no less, and although he is calmer, more peaceful and hardly excited, once he starts, he doesn't stop, and for him every fight means the death of one of two combatants; he retains all the meekness and all the tenacity and fury of the karabaw about him. The climate influences bipedal animals in the same way as it does in quadrupedal animals. The terrible lessons and harsh teachings that these struggles have given the Filipinos will have served to improve their morale and strengthen them. The Spain of the fifteenth century was not that of the eighth century.

With severe experience, instead of entering into internecine fights between islands, as is generally feared, they will stretch out their arms to each other, like shipwrecked men when they reach an island after a frightful stormy night. Don't go saying that what happened to the small American republics will happen to us. These easily won their independence, and their inhabitants are animated by a spirit different from that of the Filipinos. Besides, the danger of falling again into other hands, English or German, for example, will force them to be sensible and prudent. The not great preponderance of any one race over the others will drive from the imagination all mad ambition to dominate, and as the tendency of tyrannized countries, once they throw off the yoke, is to adopt the freest Government, like a boy leaving school , like the oscillation of the pendulum, by a law of reaction the Islands will probably declare themselves a federal Republic.... If the Philippines achieve their independence after heroic and tenacious struggles, they can be sure that neither England nor Germany, Not even France, and least of all Holland, will dare to collect what Spain has not been able to preserve.

Africa, in a few years, will completely absorb the attention of Europeans, and there is no sensible nation that, in order to gain a handful of poor and hardened islands, neglects the immense territories that the Black Continent offers it, virgin, unexploited and little defended. England already has enough colonies in the East and is not going to risk losing her balance; she is not going to sacrifice her empire in India for the poor Philippine Archipelago; if she entertained this intention, she would not have returned Manila in 1763; she would have kept any point in the Philippines to leave from there, expanding little by little. Besides, why does the merchant John Bull need to kill himself for the Philippines when she is no longer the mistress of the Orient, when Singapore, Hong Kong, Shanghai, etc., are there? Probably, England will look favorably on the independence of the Philippines, which will open her ports and give more franchises to her trade. Furthermore, in the United Kingdom there are tendencies and opinions that believe that they already have too many colonies, that these are harmful, and that they greatly weaken the mother country. For the same reasons Germany will not want to venture, and because an imbalance of her forces and a war in distant countries endanger her existence on the continent; Thus we see that her attitude, both in the Pacific and in Africa, is limited to easily conquering territories that do not belong to anyone.

Germany shuns all external complications. France has more to do and sees more future in Tonkin and China, in addition to the fact that the French spirit does not shine because of its colonizing desire; France loves glory, but the glory and laurels that grow on the battlefields of Europe: the echo of the battlefields of the Far East does not satisfy her thirst for renown very much, because it arrives very muffled. She also finds herself with other obligations, both in the interior and on the Continent. Holland is sensible and will be content to keep the Moluccas and Java; Ella sumata offers him more future than the Philippines, whose seas and coasts are a bad omen for the Dutch expeditions. The Netherlands is very cautious in Sumatra and Borneo, for fear of losing everything. China will consider herself quite happy if she manages to remain united and does not dismember, or is divided among the European powers that colonize the Asian Continent. The same thing happens to Japan. She has Russia to the North, which covets and spies on her; to the South England, which is entered even in the official language.

It is also under such European diplomatic pressure that it will not be able to think abroad until it is free of it, and it will not easily consent to it. It is true that she is overpopulated, but Korea is more attractive to her than the Philippines, and it is also easier to take. Perhaps the great American Republic, whose interests lie in the Pacific and which has no share in the spoils of Africa, will one day think of overseas possessions. It is not impossible, because the example is contagious, greed and ambition are vices of the strong, and Harrison expressed something in this sense when the question of Samoa; but neither the Panama Canal is open, nor do the territories of the States have a plethora of inhabitants, and if he openly attempted it, the European powers would not allow him free passage, knowing very well that the appetite was whetted with the first bites . North America would be too troublesome a rival, if she once practices the trade. It is also against their traditions. Very probably the Philippines will defend with unspeakable ardor the liberty purchased at the cost of so much blood and sacrifice.

With the new men that sprout from their bosom and with the memory of their past, they will perhaps dedicate themselves to openly entering the broad road of progress, and all will work together to strengthen their country, both inside and outside, with the same enthusiasm with which a young man goes back to tilling his parents' field, so long devastated and abandoned thanks to the negligence of those who alienated him. Then he will return to dig up gold from the mines to remedy misery, iron to arm himself, copper, lead, coal, etc.; Perhaps the country will resurrect the maritime and mercantile life to which the islanders are called by Nature, their aptitudes and their instincts, and free again, like the bird that leaves the cage, like the flower that returns to the open air, it will return to recover the old good qualities that little by little he is losing, and he will once again be a lover of peace, jovial, cheerful, smiling, hospitable and audacious. This and other things may happen within a hundred years or so.


But the most logical augury, the prophecy based on best odds can fail for insignificant and remote causes. An octopus that clung to Marco Antonio's ship changed the face of the world; a cross on Calvary and a just man nailed to it, changed the morality of half of humanity, and yet, before Christ, how many just have not perished wickedly and how many crosses were not planted on that hill! The death of the Just sanctified his work and made his doctrine incontrovertible. A ravine in the Battle of Waterloo buried all the glories of two luminous decades, the entire Napoleonic world, and freed Europe. On what fortuitous accidents will the destinies of the Philippines depend? However, it is not good to trust in the eventual; there is an imperceptible and sometimes incomprehensible logic in the works of history. It is good that both peoples and governments adjust to it.

And for this reason we repeat and will always repeat, as long as there is time, that it is better to anticipate the desires of a people, than to yield: the former captures sympathy and love; the second, contempt and anger. Since it is necessary to give six million Filipinos their rights in order for them to be in fact Spanish, let the Government give them to them freely and spontaneously, without injurious reservations, without irritating suspicions. We will not tire of repeating it as long as we have a glimmer of hope: we prefer this unpleasant task to having one day to say to the Mother Country: «Spain, we have used our youth to serve your interests in the interests of our country; we have turned to you, we have spent all the light of our intelligence, all the ardor and enthusiasm of our hearts to work for the good of what was yours, to elicit from you a look of love, a liberal policy that assures us the peace of our country and your dominion over addicted but unfortunate islands! Spain, you have remained deaf, and, wrapped in your pride, you have continued your disastrous path and have accused us of being traitors, only because we love our country, because we tell you the truth, and we hate all kinds of injustices.

What do you want us to say to our miserable country, when they ask us about the success of our efforts? Shall we tell her that, since we have lost everything for her, youth, future, illusions, tranquility, family; since in her service we have exhausted all the resources of hope, all the disappointments of longing, may she also receive the rest that does not serve us, the blood in our veins and the vitality that remains in our arms? Spain! Will we one day tell the Philippines that you have no ears for her ills, and that if she wishes to save herself, she must redeem herself?» The Solidarity; no. 24: Madrid, January 31, 1890. 

<!-- End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of the Philippines Within One Hundred Years (Social-Political Study), by José Rizal -->