---
title: "Defects of the Line of Head"
heading: "Chapter 6b of Part 2"
# date: 2021-11-20
date: 2020-01-10
image: "/photos/objects/hand.jpg"
description: ""
---



Any defect on the Head line indicates:
- mental disturbance, which may be the result of illness, or
- the unsteady character of the mentality. 

In making a distinction between character and diseases the Life line should be examined to see if it is also defective at about the same period as the defect appears on the Head line. Anything abnormal found on the Life line will fix the defect on the Head line as an illness. The nails must also be consulted in connection with the Head line, for if badly fluted they tell of great nervous disturbance, which is emanating from the centre of nerve force, the brain. If in addition to a defective Head line, fluted and brittle nails are found you are warned that the subject is using up his nervous vitality faster than it can be generated and is in danger of paralysis. This is further confirmed if the subject be either a Saturnian, Mercurian, or Lunarian. 

The color of the hand and particularly of the lines is exceedingly important in this investigation. If too white, the anaemic condition furnishes little blood, and the operation of the brain will be weakened. On the other hand, extreme redness will show that blood in excessive quantity and in too great strength is being forced to the brain. Either of these indications show an abnormal condition and indicate disease, whiteness predisposing to weakness and insufficiency, and redness indicating liability to fevers or apoplexy. The latter condition is to be read from the presence of stars, crosses, dots, or deep cutting of the line, red color being also present with these markings. When a defective Head line is noted, use the Life line as indicated above, the Mercury line in the same way as the Life line, together with nails and color, for all these must be consulted along with the type of the subject, and from this combined point of view you will be able to distinguish health defects from mental defects. 

The Line Of Head Part 2 246 No. 89. The Line Of Head Part 2 247 No. 90. The starting-point or source of the Head line must be noted. In the greater number of hands the line rises from the line of Life, to which it is slightly attached at the start (89), and branches away from the Life line, sometimes near the beginning of that line, sometimes farther along (90). At this point the Head line registers the early years of life, and the sooner the line separates from the Life line, the younger was the subject when he began to think for himself. The longer the Head line is tied to the Life line the less self-confidence has the subject and the more he relies upon the advice of others. The longer the period covered by this union of the two lines, the later in life did the subject begin to rely upon himself. The Head line is not often bound to the Life line longer than the twelfth year, and many Head lines are seen which only touch the Life line at its beginning, showing that as a mere child the subject was self-reliant. 

In examining the beginning of the Head line note how sharp the angle formed by the lines of Head and Life. The more pointed this angle (90), the more sensitive the subject, the easier are his feelings hurt, and if in addition the sensitive pads are found on the ends of the fingers, this sensitive disposition will be extreme. The subject will do almost anything rather than hurt the feelings of others, and the lives of such will be often made unhappy by unintentional slights. The type of the subject and his finger-tips must be taken into consideration here. With pointed tips and this acute angle the subject will be entirely lacking in self-reliance, timid, cautious, leaning constantly upon someone else, and suffering a fall every time the support is taken away. With thick fingers and square or spatulate tips the indications will not be extreme sensitiveness, but must be read as denoting prudence and caution. Often the Head line is merged in the Life line at the start, and in this case the head did not begin to assert itself, but the subject depended upon others until the year when the line breaks away from the line of Life. Sometimes the Head line does not leave the Life line until well along in its course (91). 

In this case the mental activities began later in life. This even goes so far as to produce in some hands the formation of an obtuse angle (92), which shows the subject to be somewhat callous to slights. If, with this latter marking, the finger-tips be square or spatulate and the fingers and palm thick and red, the subject will be very dense, and if only the lines of Head, Heart, and Life are present, it will indicate elementary heaviness of intellect and unimpressionability. These subjects will be cautious, non-committal, dependent on others, lacking ability to command, unoriginal, blunt, and tactless. When the line of Head is distinctly separated from the line of Life (93) it shows primarily self-reliance. 

The subject is original, is not bound down by the views of others, acts for and depends upon himself, can plan well, is guided by his own judgment, is independent and courageous in his views, and therefore this separation, if not too wide, is a fine marking. The wider the separation the greater the degree of self-reliance, consequently the marking may degenerate into such boldness and self-esteem that the subject becomes foolhardy and not a safe counsellor. With this separated line note the tips, for, if pointed, the self-reliance may run to idealism, if spat-ulate, to great energy and originality, producing a brain fertile in new schemes, and, as the subject does not ask advice, he is likely to commit grave errors. Square tips are safest, for their good common-sense will be a restraining element. Note the length of the fingers, for, if very short, the quickness in making up the mind, added to the self-reliance of the separated lines, easily leads to impulsive, hasty, and dangerous conclusions.

If, in addition, the fingers are smooth, impulsiveness will be intensified. Knots indicate a restraining element that it is good to have present with these separated lines. This marking, in whatever degree of separation it is seen, always indicates a subject with well-defined individuality; the wider the separation the more marked is the self-reliance and the consequent individuality. Always regard this marking as requiring care, for the owner is an unusual subject, and everything must be weighed in order to determine whether the self-reliance and self-esteem shown by the indications run to a danger point. The Line Of Head Part 3 248 No. 91. The Line Of Head Part 3 249 No. 92. The Line Of Head Part 3 250 No. 93. The Line Of Head Part 3 251 No. 94. It might be supposed that these separated lines would indicate lack of sensitiveness, as does an obtuse angle formed by the line starting low on the Life line, but such is not the case. In fact the opposite is true, for the separated Head and Life lines produce most sensitive people. They do not always show nor own it, but such is the case. 

I have made up my mind, after having investigated a great deal in the endeavor to discover why this sign should indicate sensitiveness, that it is owing to pride, for the subject being extremely self-reliant, and confident of his own ability, allows his feelings to be hurt by anything which indicates that others have not the same degree of confidence in him that he has in himself. Sometimes the line of Head rises inside the line of Life on the lower Mount of Mars, and, after crossing the Life line, winds its way across the hand (94). This subject is extremely vacillating. He starts many things with enthusiasm and before he dies will have made innumerable changes. He is a shifter who constantly alters his opinions and does not continue in the same way of thinking long at a time. He is always intense in his views, makes most violent resolutions, and changes his mind with facility, but always with the same vigor. These subjects are rarely successful, for they do not stick to anything long enough to win. 

They are always aggressive, for the Head line rises from lower Mars, consequently they are frequently in trouble, always picking quarrels, and are avoided by those who do not want contention. The shifting mind and quarrelsome disposition are a poor combination, for one can never tell what tack these people may take next. If the color of the hand and lines be red, this will add to the unpleasantness of the indication, if yellow, the subject will be intolerably mean, in addition. The less mentality the hand indicates, the less will the subject be able to overcome the trouble, but good first phalanges to the fingers, a long second phalanx of thumb, with a long, narrow, or paddle-shaped first phalanx of that member, will give the subject forces with which he can largely counteract the shifting disposition indicated by such a Head line. Sometimes the Head line rises from the Mount of Jupiter (95).

This line shows fine capability for leadership, a person who can handle men with ease and get the most out of them, one who is self-confident; and this source of the Head line is always an indication of strong mentality. There is diplomacy present which enables the subject to dictate without being harsh, to rule when he seems to be ruled, to appear dependent when he knows all depends on him; he is brainy, brilliant, and successful. Always note his type; if of a coarse make-up, the tact and diplomacy will disappear; he will lead but men will feel his strength. If the hand be fine, he will accomplish all he wishes, and men will not know how he does it. Sometimes the line will rise just at the base of the Mount of Jupiter (96), sometimes it will sweep clear up to the base of the finger, as in No. 95. Between these two sources are many degrees, and your estimate of the strength of the indication must be in proportion to its degree of marking on the Mount. Sometimes the line rises from the Life line but a branch rises to the Mount of Jupiter (97). This shows that ambition and the desire to be great or famous rule the subject. If the hand be purely a mental one, the subject's ambitions will be for mental fame. 

If the hand be purely artistic, his ambitions will be for fame in that direction. If the hand be purely material, his ambition will be for riches. He will always strive to rise, and the life generally follows an upward grade. The Line Of Head Part 4 252 No. 95. The Line Of Head Part 4 253 No. 96. The course of the line through the hand is next to be considered. In cutting its way across the hand, the straighter the line runs (98), and the less it is changed in its course, the more fixed are the ideas of the subject, the more evenly is he balanced mentally, and the more practical and common-sense are his views. This line shows that he pursues an even course, and that outside influences have very little effect on him. He gauges everything by a practical standard and accepts what he chooses, allowing the balance to pass by without making much impression on him. 

The tendency or danger indicated by this line is that of becoming too unimpressionable, too inelastic, too sordid, to allow of adaptability. These subjects often do not make many friends, as they want everyone to come to their way of thinking. Everything is subjected to plain common-sense, often narrow views, and anything speculative or ideal is an abomination. This straight line must be the gauge by which you judge all deflections. When the line of Head rises on or under Jupiter, we have the qualities of that Mount exerting strong influence on the subject, and it is seldom that a line will be so placed that it can be deflected upward toward the Mount of Jupiter, but we do find the line deflected under the other Mounts. The line of Head normally curves upward slightly in the beginning of its course, and in most hands this curve is about midway between Jupiter and Saturn.

When the line so perceptibly curves under Saturn (99) that its course is greatly changed, it shows that the subject is strongly tinged with Saturnian ideas. Often when every other method of classifying your subject into his proper type has failed, the Head line deflected toward a Mount will do it for you. The greater the deflection of the line toward Saturn the more surely will Saturnian ideas be strong in the subject. 

You must note the character of the hand with this marking; if the mental world rules, then your client will love the study and research for which the Saturnian is famous; if the middle world rules, he will love farming, mining, and horticulture; if the lower world rules, his ideas will run toward the saving of money. If the line is deflected toward Apollo (100), the subject's mind will run in Apollonian channels. If the upper world rules, it will be art, pure and simple; if the middle world is stronger, money-making and love of beauty will be combined; if the lower world dominates, love of display, and a coarser love of the artistic will be indicated. The larger the deflection the greater is the degree of influence exerted by Apollo, and this is true of all deflections. When the line is deflected toward Mercury (101) it shows that Mercurian ideas are strong. 

If the upper world rules, fine powers of expression, persuasive force, even oratorical power, are indicated. The kind will be shown by the shape of the finger-tips. If the middle world is strongest, the mind will lean toward scientific investigations and the subject will be a good physician, teacher, or lawyer. If the lower world rules, money-making talent is strongly indicated. With a deflection toward this Mount, watch the crooking and twisting of the finger, to determine how much added shrewdness is present, and how near the subject is to roguery. If the line is wavy from source to termination (102) it will show that the subject has had no permanent fixedness of ideas. The variations which may occur in this wavy line are infinite, but by following the line from its beginning you can tell the age when each mental variation occurs and in what direction it tends. This reading of the line by sections will give the mental changes in detail. 


The general interpretation which must be applied to a wavy line is a lack of continuous mental effort in any one direction, changeability of purpose, and consequent vacillation. Such a Head line is never self-reliant. As counsellors and advisers these people are not safe, for their opinions are not long the same. It is an unstable line, and shows unstable ideas. The line is often seen deflecting upward in a curve which may take it close to the line of Heart (103). This will show that the heart is a stronger factor than the head, and that sentiment will largely influence the subject. If the deflection of the Head toward the Heart line begins early in the line, and continues to the end, it will show that the heart was always the strongest, even from the beginning of life. If the deflection occurs later, this condition began later. 

If the deflection is slight, the heart will influence but not entirely rule the subject; if it is very great the heart will largely dictate. It is necessary with this indication to note which line is the deeper and stronger. If the Heart line, then sentiment will guide and reason will give way. If the Head, then reason will assert itself, often producing mental distress because the dictates of the heart cannot be followed. 


Sometimes the line is found deflecting downward (104). The straight Head line marks the medium or nearest normal condition, and, generally speaking, all rising deflections come from an uplifting force, and conversely all downward deflections come from a downward influence. Consequently when the line of Head is seen to deflect downward, we feel that the mental attitude of the subject has been lowered during the period covered by this deflection. As the straight Head line shows the operation of a practical mentality, the downward deflection shows that a departure from the practical lines of thought occurs during the deflection, at what age can be read on the line.

The Mount of Moon, the seat of imagination, being set at the base of the hand, is considered as the attracting power which causes the Head line to start downward. I have observed in the hands of many spiritists and of persons strongly impressed with psychic phenomena that the period at which these matters began to greatly interest them could be determined by a downward deflection of the Head line. If the deflection is short, the subject is for a time pulled in that direction, hut the line coming back to the straight course again shows that the ideas have been drawn back into the practical line again. If the deflection covers the whole line (105), there has been conflict between practical ideas and a desire to indulge in imaginative things, but as the line at the end gets back to the straight position, the inference is that practical ideas have conquered.

When the line is deflected downward under a Mount (as in 104) the qualities of that Mount have impelled the subject to such thoughts as are indicated by the downward deflection. The three worlds will tell which side of the type qualities, mental, money-making, or baser, have caused the mental change. The Line Of Head Part 5 261 No. 104. The Line Of Head Part 5 262 No. 106. The Line Of Head Part 5 263 No. 106. The Line Of Head Part 5 264 No. 107. With all deflections note the character of the line before, during, and after a deflection and this will show the outcome. If a line is found deep and well cut before, thin during, and chained after (106), it will show that a vigorous mind (before) became less vigorous (during) and was impaired (after), the ages to be read from the line. If the line is thin at the start, chained during deflection, and ends in a star (107), the subject has a weak mind to start with, which was impaired by whatever caused the deflection, and ends in an explosion, as shown by the star. 

This will show either insanity or death; look to Life line, nails, color, type, etc., to determine which. These illustrations are only two out of the infinite number of combinations which may be found, and are given simply in order to show the method of reasoning. The source of the line shows the starting of the mental activity, the course through the hand indicates the changes which have affected it, and the termination shows the ultimate outcome. If the line be short, either the mentality is not great, or the termination of it comes early in life, by death or loss of mind. This matter has been treated under the head of " Length of the Line," and will not be reconsidered here. When the line is very short and turns upward toward Saturn (108) the mental attitude of the subject will be Saturniaa, and a health defect of Saturn will cause early death. As we are considering the Head line, this health defect must apply to something affecting the head, which is manifestly the brain. 

Paralysis is a prominent defect of the Saturnian will be the cause to which you may ascribe the end. Nails fluted, turning back, or brittle, yellow color, and many chance lines in the hand, a thin Life line, chained, islanded, broken, or otherwise defective, will enable you to confirm the indication. Older palmists gave to this line the reading " sudden death," the reason for this must be apparent. 

If this line runs up on to the Mount of Saturn (109), the indication is doubly sure. If it ends in a star, a cross, or a dot (110), the sudden termination of the mentality and the life is assured. If the line ends in a tassel (111), paralysis followed by paresis is indicated, as the tassel shows the gradual dissipation and diffusion of the mental powers and not the sudden shock and catastrophe which the cross, the dot, or the star portend. The Line Of Head Part 5 265 No. 108. The Line Of Head Part 5 266 No. 109. The Line Of Head Part 5 267 No. 110. The older palmists ascribed grave results to all indications in which Saturn was concerned. This was because of the serious disorders peculiar to the Saturnian.

When the line of Head turns up toward Apollo (112) it shows that the subject is strong in Apollonian ideas. The world which rules in each case will determine to which side of the type the ideas lean. In all of these cases where the Head line turns up toward a Mount it is an indication that the mental stamina is not especially strong. 

If it were, the subject might belong to a type, might be strong in his love of all things peculiar to the type, and yet would not lose self-control, or allow the typical Mount qualities to entirely dominate him, as must be the case when the line of Head is pulled out of its course and toward a Mount. When the line is drawn upward, but is not long enough to reach the Mount, heart or sentiment are stronger than head, and the subject has allowed a mere love of the things peculiar to some particular type to dominate him instead of reason. In other words, his head has been overcome by his feelings. 

When the Head line rises and is merged in the Heart line (113) it shows that the subject allows his feelings to overcome his judgment. This has been used by some palmists as indicating criminality. 



It is not per se an indication of such tendencies. It does show that when the emotions, the sentiments, the feelings, the desires, or whatever it may be are aroused, that the subject will lose self-control and often commit crime in response to the appeal of his passions. He is not necessarily criminal, though he may be weak. Viewed in this light, if the hand be brutal, Mount of Venus large, full, and red, with Heart line deep and red, nails short, Mounts of Mars large, you will have one, who to satisfy his desires would become criminal and even commit murder. His head will not be strong enough to control the passions which rage within him. If the line cut clear up into Apollo (114), the cutting of the Heart line under Apollo by the Head line, will indicate a complication of the heart difficulty of the Apollonian, and some disorder in the mental health, most probably apoplexy. Note the Mount of Jupiter, color of hands, lines, nails, and all other-indications which may throw light on the subject. 


If at the point where the two lines cross they are deep cut and red, the danger will be serious. If at this point there is a star (115) the danger is very grave, for the explosion is most likely. If this marking is followed by an island (116), the shock will permanently weaken the mind, and at the least brain fever is indicated. If the line of Head turns toward Mercury (117), it will show how strongly the Mercurian qualities attract the subject. No matter what side of the Mercurian is developed, there will be a love of and talent for money-making. So strong is this desire for money that the subject will ruin his health or make any sacrifice to obtain it. As employers these people are tyrannical and exacting, they desire to make "every edge cut" and will work employees just as long as they can, and give them the least possible material with which to do the work. They love bargains, and will go miles to save a few pennies. Everything is measured by its money value. 

When this line is seen, note carefully the type of the subject. If he be a bad or mean Saturnian, the combination of this type with the Head line rising to Mercury is distressing. If he be a crooked Mercurian you know that honestly or dishonestly, as may be necessary, he will have money. The crooked and twisted finger, with short nails should cause you to make your estimate strong, and if no Heart line is seen you know that the subject will stop at nothing. If you find this line on a good hand read it merely as the love of money. If with it the Medical Stigmata is present (118), which indicates the especial aptitude for medicine, you will have the money-making physician, if with this line the third phalanx of the finger is longest the money-making business man.


No matter what the combination, the money side is strong. If the line goes clear up into the Mount (119), it will be in addition a health warning. The bilious tendency, the stomach disorder, and the nervousness, always present, will affect the head and produce vertigo, though serious results are not often encountered from the indication per se. The time period of the line when it has reached this point is about seventy and at that time the end is naturally not far distant. If the line should end in a star (120), sudden death is indicated. When the line runs into the upper Mount of Mars (121) it shows that practical common-sense ideas prevail. It is the medium position and the mental qualities are not pulled out of their balance. If upper Mars be well developed, it will give its qualities to the subject, who will defend himself when attacked, will be cool, calm, brave, and warlike in spirit. If the Mount be deficient, the mentality will partake of these deficiencies in Martian qualities and the subject will be easily discouraged, unable to resist strong attacks, and lacking in confidence. Whatever would be attributed to the Mount, attribute to the line. But whatever these attributes may be, the line ending here always gives practical ideas about everything. 

In very many bands the Head line slopes more or less toward the Mount of the Moon (122). This sloping of the line shows that the subject is somewhat influenced by imagination and is not practical to the exclusion of everything else.

There is a great misconception prevalent concerning this sloping Head line, which has been used as indicating danger of insanity. Nothing can be farther from the truth, for such a Head line is found on the hands of most sensible, self-contained, practical persons. Because one has the ability to imagine does not mean that he is insane or likely to be, neither does it follow that he is unpractical, so, if the line of Head be good, deep, well cut, and clear, little concern need be felt because it inclines toward the Mount of Moon. With this indication, as with all others, excess may make it bad.' 

Other combinations with the line, or the character of the line itself, may spoil it, but the general proposition is, the line running toward the Moon shows that the subject is not entirely material in his ideas, but has the power of imagination. This is an essential qualification for writers, speakers, and linguists, and in the most successful men of these professions I find all degrees of droop to the Head line, some going far down into the Mount, and these persons have ability as writers of fiction and poetry (123). A line to reach the Moon must be a long one, so there is in these cases no lack of mentality.


It is only when the drooping line is seen on a poor type of subject or when it is thin or defective that it is unfavorable. As excess of imagination is one species of insanity; the drooping Head line with other unfavorable signs will clearly indicate mental derangement. If the line droops low on the Mount and ends in a star (124), it will indicate insanity. Drooping to the Moon and ending in a chain (125), it will tell of mental impairment.

If it droops to the Moon and ends in a cross (126), it will indicate a check to the mentality. If it droops and ends in an island (127) or a dot (128), there is danger of mental disturbance. In these cases the size of the island or dot will tell how serious. If on the Mount of Moon the line is broken (129) and intermittent, it is another indication of mental disturbance. These markings of the line are more dangerous because the line droops to the Moon, the imaginative tendencies of the Mount making it a fertile place for such trouble. In every case the curve toward the Moon must be carefully considered. If it begins to droop from the start of the line (130), the tendency of the ideas have always been in that direction. If the line runs straight during the first part of its course and then slopes downward (131), the practical plane at the beginning is changed to a tendency toward imaginative ideas later in life, the date to be read from the point where the droop begins. 

Such violent changes or markings are not the best ones with this line; it is when the line forms a graceful curve, and gradually tends downward that no bad results follow. Sometimes the line forks at the end (132). This will indicate versatility, a union of practical and imaginative ideas which make the subject see things from a double point of view. I have seen this marking on the hands of successful theatrical people, and those who successfully appeal to the public in other ways. If the fork be slight, it must be read simply as versatility. 

If it be more marked, as in No. 133, it shows that the subject has a strong practical set of ideas and a strong set of imaginative ones. He can see things from both the practical and fanciful sides, and with this double point of view, he is less inclined to be narrow and one-sided. By noting which of the two forks is deeper and stronger, you can tell which side (practical or imaginative) will obtain the mastery. 


This is a fine marking on a good hand. The double line, however, with its double point of view, often leads a subject into the habit of falsifying. He is not always an intentional liar; often he is not sure whether he is telling the literal story or the imaginative one. His imagination is vivid, and he sometimes makes himself think he is telling the truth when he is not. Prom the forking Head line is produced the liar, and when seen on an otherwise bad hand, it will make you sure of this interpretation. In habitual liars, I have found the forking Head line always present. Sometimes they lie from pride or vanity, for mercenary or vicious ends, and in each case the forking Head line will be seen. 

This applies to habitual falsifiers, not mere occasional "story tellers." If the line has a fork with one line running to upper Mars and one going low on to the Moon, with this fork again forking (134), it will show that the double-pointed imagination, shown by the forked fork on the Moon, will be so vivid that the subject will "stretch" everything and will lie when the truth is better. He possesses such an enlarged imagination that he magnifies everything to double the original size, and all descriptions show this distortion. 

If the fork on the Moon ends in a star, a cross, or a dot (135), it will be practically certain that the enlarged imagination will produce insanity from, first, over-imagination; second, mental disease shown by the star, cross, or dot. In the two cases above mentioned, if the Mount of Moon be grilled and much rayed, it will add to the force of the indication all of the restlessness of the Lunarian. It will emphasize every bad indication found on a much drooped and forked line of Head. 

By keeping constantly in mind what constitutes a clear line of Head and what makes it defective, you can distinguish between a good, healthy imagination and mental disorder, and you will never tell a fine writer that he is going crazy.

Sometimes a line of Head divides into three well-cut forks, one going toward Mercury, one toward Mars, and one toward the Moon (136). This is a splendid marking, showing great diversity of intellect, adaptability, and versatility. In this case the three terminations unite business (Mercury), resistance (upper Mars), and imagination (the Moon). This combination generally produces a successful career, and unless laziness, lack of ambition, or some other defect is very strongly marked, a subject with this triple-forked termination will achieve much. In rare cases the Head line curves around and ends on the Mount of Venus (137). This will indicate that Venusian ideas of attraction are uppermost in the mind of the subject. This line is long, so there is plenty of mentality, and if it be deep and clear it is not per se an indication of defective mental health, but it shows the drawing, attracting power of Venus.


