---
title: "Line of Mars, Ring of Solomon, Ring of Saturn"
image: "/photos/objects/hand.jpg"
description: "THE line of Mars rises on the lower Mount of Mars and runs inside of the Life line and very close beside it"
linkb: /research/benham/palmistry/part-2/chapter-28-girdle
linkbtext: "Chapter 2"
linkf: /research/benham/palmistry/part-2/chapter-28-girdle
linkftext: "Chapter 2c"
---


THE line of Mars rises on the lower Mount of Mars and runs inside of the Life line and very close beside it.

The two are sister lines, in fact, and in order to be in full strength the former must run so near to the Life line that it is manifestly related only to it and is not one of the lines of Influence on the Mount of Venus.
This line was called the line of Mars because it rises upon one of the Martian Mounts, and its effect is to strengthen its sister line and to indicate a stronger constitution than is shown by even a deep Life line. The line of Mars must always be used in connection with the Life line and with the type of the subject. 

If the Life line be thin, broad and shallow, or chained, and a line of Mars be present, the subject will be inherently delicate, but there will be an underlying vital strength which will prevent the delicacy from taking any serious form. If the Life line be deep, and a strong line of Mars be also present, the subject will have tremendous vitality, great endurance, and much aggression. These subjects are intense and their danger lies in overdoing. The great vital force which they possess is constantly impelling them to action, and they never do anything by halves. They have vitality to spare, and are constantly seeking a source of outlet. If Jupiterians, they are great feasters and drinkers, and if red color be present will indulge in carousals in which only those as strong as themselves can keep the pace. Martians with this marking are also great eaters and drinkers, and in addition are natural fighters. 

They can endure more physical strain than any other type, consequently they make good soldiers and campaigners. The danger to such a subject is that when he is not kept under the strain of physical exertion, he will work off his surplus energy in rioting and drinking. Many confirmed drunkards have this marking, their trouble having originated in an excess of vital force, without hard work enough to use it up. Black or red hair on the hands adds to these indications. If the line of Mars extends the full length of the Life line, its strengthening power will be present during the entire life of the subject. If it runs but part of the way it will be exerted only during its presence, the age at which it disappears to be read from the Life line. If any defects be seen in the Life line, and a line of Mars runs past this point (536), the delicacy or danger shown by the defects will not prove fatal, owing to the underlying vitality indicated by the line of Mars. If lines rise from the Line of Mars and cross the Life line (537), they show a constant tendency of the subject to rise in life, owing to the strengthening of the constitution indicated by the line of Mars. 

If a line or lines rise from the line of Mars and merge into the Head line (538), the subject will have increased mental strength, owing to the overflow into mental channels of some of the vitality of the line of Mars. If a line rises from the line of Mars and merges into the Saturn line (539), the upward career of the subject will be more certain, owing to the strong vitality behind him. If rising lines from the line of Mars cut the Head line (540), the great vitality will be too strong for the brain, and it will be injured by constant straining. In this case the subject is so strong that he does not know when he has overtaxed his strength, and the brain shows the first indication of wear. If the hand be sensual, developed at the base, and have a large Mount of Venus, together with a strong Life line and line of Mars, the subject will be excessive in the indulgence of sexual appetites. He will be so very healthy that the sexual powers will be great, and, with a sensual hand, which is sure to be filled with desire, he will not stop to consider morality but will indulge his appetites. If with such a hand and a strong line of Mars, a line rise from it and cut the line of Apollo or Saturn (541), the indulgence of his desires will be a decided check to the career. If the Line of Apollo ends in a dot, cross, or bar, the reputation of the subject will be lost. If with such a hand a rising line from a strong line of Mars cuts the line of Affection, the unfaithfulness of the subject will ruin the happiness of the married life. This will be intensified if the line of Affection ends in a fork (542). If the line of Mars sweeps across the hand at its base and ends upon the Mount of the Moon (543). it will show so much vitality that the ordinary length of life is not sufficient to expend it. This is a frequent marking on the hands of drunkards, who have all of the restlessness of the Lunar subjects. They will be great travellers, and expend a good deal of energy in this way. 

The rest will be used in "wine, women, and song." If this line ends in a cross, dot, bar, or star, the subject will die very suddenly after a life of great excess. If the Life line ends in a cross or star, this reading will be intensified. If the Head line about midway becomes defective it will show that the pace is too rapid and the brain is being exhausted. If the Head line ends in a star, the subject will at that age become insane. If the line of Mars be deeper than the Life line it shows that the underlying strength is more powerful than the natural constitution. With such a marking this secondary force will be a stronger factor than the Life line, and the line of Mars must be read most carefully by applying to it the same methods used with the Life line. If the line of Mars be thinner than the Life line, it shows that it is simply acting as a sister line, and its effort will be to strengthen the constitution and improve the condition of life for the subject. The line of Mars, of itself a good indication, may, by running to excess, prove disastrous. There will be no trouble, however, to accurately gauge its effect, if good judgment be used and the line be made to fit the type of subject having it. If the Life line runs an even course to the end of the life, and is supported by a line of Mars proportionate to it in strength, the subject will have a smooth career, unclouded by ill-health, with vital force enough to meet all the necessities of life ; he will live well, peacefully, and long, and die beloved and respected. Gladstone had such a. Martian line as this. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 686 No. 535. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 687 No. 536. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 688 No. 537. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 689 No. 538. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 690 No. 539. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 691 No. 540. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 692 No. 541. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 693 No. 542. The Minor Lines Line Of Mars 694 No. 543.


## Ring of Solomon

The line which has received the title of the Ring of Solomon is a small line rising between the fingers of Jupiter and Saturn, running downward and encircling the Mount of Jupiter, and ending near the beginning of the Life line (544). It is an indication of a love for occult studies, and of an ability to obtain proficiency in them if other necessary Chirognomic indications be present. It is most often seen in a much-lined hand, and generally a Croix Mistique is also found in the quadrangle. I have seen many subjects with this marking who have developed great aptitude for occult studies, and none in whose hands I have noted it have ever been lacking in a fondness for Psychology. The great raying and lining present in most of the hands in which I have seen it would of itself indicate great impressionability and numerous emotions, and such subjects are always interested in new things. 

The Ring of Solomon by itself, however, must not be taken as a sign manual of proficiency in the realm of occult thought. It is only an indication which should draw your attention in this direction. Before committing yourself to any extent on the occult powers of the subject, see if a good brain and other necessary adjuncts be present. See if energy, ability to study, and perseverance are indicated. Dreamy idlers who rely upon inspiration or revelations from on high, and not upon good reasoning, compose only the cranks in the field of occult studies. Even a good Ring of Solomon will not rescue such from the multitude of those who have done nothing but talk. People who have accomplished much in the psychic world have square or spatulate tips with knotty joints, and their success has been largely due to hard study and the application of good reasoning. The Ring Of Solomon 695 No. 544. The presence of a Ring of Solomon will help all of these students. The kind of subject on which it is seen must, however, be the guide in reading this line.

Ring of Saturn

The Ring of Saturn is a line which rises between the fingers of Jupiter and Saturn, encircles the finger of Saturn, and terminates between the finger of Saturn and Apollo, thus crossing the Mount of Saturn completely (545). Sometimes it makes a perfect circle, and often it is composed of a couple of lines which cross on the Mount of Saturn. In many cases the circle is not entirely completed, but the ends will show that they form part of an imperfect Ring of Saturn (546). The presence of this line shows a disposition to jump from one occupation to another, and not to stick to any one long enough to make it successful. There is a lack of continuity of purpose in a subject having this marking, and poor success in his undertakings is the usual result. While this line, per se, does not make failure in life a necessity, it is to be seen on a great many hands where the lives have been unsuccessful. I have observed it on the hands of prisoners in penitentiaries, some of them the most desperate of their class. 

I have seen it also on the hands of a number of suicides. As the Ring of Saturn cuts completely across the Mount of Saturu, it forms a barrier to the Current at that point. This makes the Mount of Saturn defective, shuts out its wisdom, seriousness, and balancing qualities, and turns them into defects. These subjects will either develop into bad Saturnians, often reaching the stage where they stop at no crime, or else, as the balance-wheel is gone, they shift from one thing to another, with no continuity in any direction, until their lives are total failures. If in such cases the upper Mount of Mars be deficient, thumb small, and Mercury line defective, especially if showing islands or a star, the subject will give way to discouragement, and become either insane or commit suicide. Soft or flabby hands, vacillating Head line, weak thumbs, poor Mounts of Mars, or a large Mount of Moon are all poor companions for the Ring of Saturn. If with a Ring of Saturn the Head line slopes low on to a Mount of Moon which is large or grilled, or both, the subject will be imaginative in the extreme, flighty, restless, changeable, and will make nothing of himself. 

Often defects and obstructions in the line of Saturn, with the Ring of Saturn present, will show that the career of the subject has been ruined because of his lack of continuity of purpose. The Apollo line will frequently be similarly affected. When searching the hand for the cause of some disaster or impediment which we see marked, the presence of a Ring of Saturn will often furnish us an explanation. As vacillation is indicated by a broken or islanded Head line, the Ring of Saturn with such a Head line will intensify the changeable character of the subject. Such a combination with a defective Saturn line will furnish an explanation of the impediments in that line. A similar combination will affect in the same manner a defective line of Apollo. The Lunarian, being the most changeable of the types, will be made much more so by a Ring of Saturn. It is hardly possible for such a subject to obtain enduring success. If the Ring of Saturn does not completely circle the Mount but is broken, it is not as unfavorable a marking as if it completed its course. In this case some outlet will be left for the Current, and the Mount of Saturn will not be made so defective. Even with this imperfect ring, however, there is a degree of its defect present, the subject having at least a tendency in that direction, and in a final estimate this fact must not be lost sight of. When the Ring of Saturn is composed of two lines which cross each other on the Mount of Saturn (547), it must be read in the same manner as a large cross on that Mount. This marking I have seen on several suicides. The Ring Of Saturn 696 No. 545. 

The Ring Of Saturn 697 No. 546. Whenever the Ring of Saturn is seen in a hand, it should warn you of a grave danger to the subject Knowing its meaning, be ready to search for all indications that may help him to overcome the vacillation which may ruin him. Apply Chirognomy, study his type and everything the lines can tell bearing on the subject of changeability of temperament. A strong will phalanx on the thumb with a good Head line are the best companions for a Ring of Saturn. With all the facts in your possession, you should be able to tell just how much influence the Ring of Saturn will exert upon any subject. The Rascettes, and Lines of Travel The Rascettes, or Bracelets, are the lines which cross the wrist at the base of the hand (548). Sometimes there are three, and there may be only one. In practice I have found them of little use, especially any save the first one. There are traditional indications, handed down from the older palmists, ascribing the addition of thirty years to the life of a subject for each Bracelet seen. I have failed to find any confirmations of such indications, and never use them as bearing upon longevity. There are other traditions concerning signs found on the Bracelets which experience has proven fallacious, and which I will not enumerate. The first Bracelet, if deep, adds an additional confirmation to other indications of a strong constitution. With a deep Life line, a deeply cut Rascette will prove an added strength. If the Rascette be poorly marked, chained, or broad and shallow, the constitution of the subject is not so strong. If short branches rise from the Rascettes, it i ndicates a rising tendency in the life of the subject, ambitious efforts, and a desire to improve. 

Long branches which rise high into the Mount of the Moon have been called " Travel lines," and read to indicate journeys. These lines increase the restlessness and desire to travel which belongs to a Lunarian subject, and there is no doubt that such a subject will improve every opportunity of travel which comes to him. From such a point of view these Travel lines can often be quite successfully used, long lines indicating more restlessness and longer journeys. The Ring Of Saturn 698 No. 547. When Travel lines are seen, the type of the subject will help to use them correctly. The Lunarian is the most anxious to travel, the Mercurian next. The Martian, Apollonian, and Jupiterian all like travel to some extent, but most often make journeys with the idea of improving their material success. The Saturnian will travel in search of knowledge, and the Venusian purely for pleasure. Spatulate tips with Travel lines are the strongest possible confirmatory companions. If the hand be very soft, however, the travels will often be mental ones. I have seen a branch from the Life line to a Travel line (549) indicate the time when a subject retired from business, changed his thoughts from business to books, and mentally travelled a great deal, though actually taking few journeys. These Travel lines must be treated as a part of the Rascettes, for they rise from the first one. One other indication of the first Rascette will complete its usefulness. When this line rises in the centre (550) it indicates a delicacy of the internal organs contained in the abdomen; in women most often the procreative organs, and constitutes a danger to them in maternity. If evidence of female weakness appears on the lower Mount of Moon, or in the Mercury line, the bulging Bracelet will add a strong confirmatory indication. These are valuable as premarriage indications, denoting the probability of a fruitful marriage. While these markings do not show absolute sterility they show a defective condition of the parts which will produce the same results. The Ring Of Saturn 699 No. 548. The Ring Of Saturn 700 No. 549. The Ring Of Saturn 701 No. 550.