+++
title= "A Treatise on Political Economy"
date= 2015-09-30
image= "/covers/economy.jpg"
description= ""
linkb= "/research/say/treatise"
linkbtext= "Index"
linkf= "/research/say/treatise"
linkftext= "Index"
heading= "Chapter 1"
icon = "/icons/say.jpg"
+++


## Digression on the Balance of Trade


The exclusive system proceeds upon these maxims:

1. The commerce of a nation is advantageous, in proportion as its exports exceed its imports, and as there is a larger cash balance receivable in specie, or in the precious metals= watch-cases, spoons, forks, dishes, coffee-pots; or rolled out into leaves for the embellishment of picture frames, bookbinding, and the like; in which case, they form part of that portion of the capital of the community, which yields no interest, but is devoted to the production of utility or pleasure.

It is doubtless an advantage to the nation, that the material, whereof this portion of its capital consists, should be cheap and abundant. The enjoyment they afford in these various ways is then obtained at a lower rate, and is more widely diffused. 

There are many establishments on a moderate scale, which, but for the discovery of America, would have been
unable to make the show of plate that is now seen upon their
tables. But this advantage must not be over-rated; there are
other utilities of a much higher order. The window-glass, that
keeps out the inclemency of the weather, is of much more
importance to our comfort, than any species of plate whatso-
ever; yet no one has ever thought of encouraging its import
or production by special favour or exemptions.

2. Through duties, prohibitions, and bounties, the government can make that balance more in favour of, or less
against, the nation.

These two maxims must be analysed minutely in the first place;
then, let us see what is the course of practice.
When a merchant sends goods abroad, he causes them to be
there sold, and receives, by the hands of his foreign corre-
spondents, the price of his goods, in the money of the coun-
try. If he expects to make a profit upon the return cargo, he
causes that price to be laid out in foreign produce, and remit-
ted home to him. The operation is with little variation the
same, when he begins at the other end; that is to say, by mak-
ing purchases abroad, which he pays for by remitting domes-
tic products thither. These operations are not always executed
on account of the same merchant. It sometimes happens that
the trader, who undertakes the outward, will not undertake
the homeward adventure. In that case he draws bills payable
after date, or upon sight, upon his correspondents, by whom
the goods have been sold; these bills he sells or negotiates, to
somebody, who sends them to the place they are drawn upon,
where they are made use of in the purchase of fresh goods,
which the last mentioned person imports himself. 150
The other utility of the precious metals is, to act as the mate-
rial of money, that is to say, of that portion of the national
capital, which is employed in facilitating the interchange of
existing values between one individual and another. For this
purpose, is it any advantage that the material selected should
be abundant and cheap? Is a nation, that is more amply pro-
vided with that material, richer than one which is more scant-
ily supplied?
In both cases, one value is exported, another value is im-
ported in return; but we have not to stop to inquire, if any part
of the value either exported or imported consisted of the pre-
cious metals. It may reasonably be assumed, that merchants,
when left the free choice of what goods they will speculate
in, will prefer those that offer the largest profit; that is to say,
those which will bear the greatest value when they arrive at
the place of destination. For example, a French merchant has
consigned brandies to England, knd has to receive from En-
gland for such his consignment, £1000 sterling= he naturally
sits down to calculate the difference between what he will
receive, if he import his £1000 in the shape of the precious
metals, and what he will receive, if he irpport that sum in the
shape of cotton manufactures. 151
I must here take leave to anticipate a position, established in
Chap. XXI of this book, wherein the subject of money is con-
sidered, namely, that the total business of national exchange
and circulation, requires a given quantity of the commodity,
money, of some amount or other. There is in France a daily
sale of so much wheat, cattle, fuel, property movable and
immovable, which sale requires the daily intervention of a
given value in the form of money, because every commodity
is first converted into money, as a step towards its further
conversion into other objects of desire. Now, whatever be the
relative abundance or scarcity of the article money, since a
given quantum is requisite for the business of circulation, the
money must of course advance in value, as it declines in quan-
tity, and decline in value as it advances in quantity. Suppose
the money of France to amount now to 3000 millions of
francs, 152 and that by some event, no matter what, it be re-
duced to 1500 millions; the.1500 millions will be quite as
valuable as the 3000 millions. The demands of circulation
require the agency of an actual value of 3000 millions; that is
to say, a value equivalent to 2000 millions of pounds of sugar,
(taking sugar at 30 sous per lb.) or to 180 millions of hectolitres
of wheat (taking wheat at 20 fr. the hectolitre). Whatever be
the weight or bulk of the material, whereof it is made, the
total value of the national money will still remain at that point;
though in the latter case, that material will be twice as valu-
If the merchant find it more advantageous to get his returns in
goods than in specie, and if it be admitted, that he knows his
own interest better than anybody else, the sole point left for
discussion is, whether returns in specie, though less advanta-
geous to the merchant, may not be better for the nation, than
returns of any other article= whether, in short, it be desirable
in a national point of view, that the precious metals should
abound, in preference to any other commodity.
What are the functions of the precious metals in the commu-
nity? If shaped into trinkets or plate, they serve for personal
ornament, for the splendour of our domestic establishments,
or for a variety of domestic purposes; they are converted into
63Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
able as in the former. An ounce of silver will buy eight in-
stead of four lbs. of sugar, and so of all other commodities;
and the 1500 millions of coin will be equivalent to the former
3000. But the nation will be neither richer nor poorer than
before. A man who goes to market with a less quantity of
coin, will be able to buy with it the same quantity of com-
modities. A nation that has chosen gold for the material of its
money, is equally rich with one that has made choice of sil-
ver, though the volume of its money be much less. Should
silver become fifteen times as scarce as at present, that is to
say, as scarce as gold now is, an ounce of silver would per-
form the same functions, in the character of money, as an
ounce of gold now does; and we should be equally rich in
money. Or, should it fall to a par with copper, we should not
be a lot the richer in the article of money; we should merely
be encumbered with a more bulky medium of circulation. But this superiority of money, in the interchange between in-
dividuals, does not extend to that between nation and nation.
In the latter, money, and, a fortiori, bullion, lose all the ad-
vantage of their peculiar character, as money, and are dealt
with as mere commodities. The merchant, who has remittances
to make from abroad, looks at nothing but the gain to be made
on those remittances, and treats the precious metals as a com-
modity he can dispose of with more or less benefit. In his
eyes, an exchange more or less is no object; for it is his busi-
ness to negotiate exchanges, so as to get a profit upon them.
An ordinary person might prefer to receive money instead of
goods, because it is an article, whose value he is better ac-
quainted with= but a merchant, who is apprised of the prices
current in most of the markets of the world, knows how to
appreciate the value he receives in return, whatever shape it
may appear under.
On the score, then, of the other utilities of the precious met-
als, and on that score only, their abundance makes a nation
richer, because it extends the sphere of those utilities, and
diffuses their use. In the character of money, that abundance
no wise contributes to national enrichment; 153 but the habits
of the vulgar lead them to pronounce an individual rich, in
proportion to the quantity of money he is possessed of; and
this notion has been extended to national wealth, which is
made up of the aggregate of individuals’ wealth. Wealth, how-
ever, as before observed, consists, not in the matter or sub-
stance, but in the value of that matter or substance. A money
of large, is worth no more than a money of small volume;
neither is a money of small, of less value than one of large
volume. Value, in the form of commodities, is equivalent to
value to the same amount in the form of money. An individual may be under the necessity of liquidating, for
the purpose of giving a new direction to his capital, or of
partition, or the like. A nation is never obliged to do so. This
liquidation is effected with the circulating money of the na-
tion, which it occupies only for the time; the same money
going almost immediately to operate another act of liquida-
tion or of exchange.
We have seen above (Chap. XV) that the abundance of specie
is not even necessary for the national facilitation of exchanges
and sales; for that buyers really buy with products, — each
with his respective portion of the products he has concurred
in creating= that with this he buys money, which serves but to
buy some further product; and that, in this operation, money
affords but a temporary convenience; like the vehicles em-
ployed to convey to market the produce of a farm, and to
bring back the articles that have been purchased with the pro-
duce. Whatever amount of money may have been employed
in the purchase of liquidation, it has passed for as much as it
was taken for= and, at the close of the transaction, the indi-
vidual is neither richer nor poorer. The loss or profit arises
out of the nature of the transaction itself, and has no refer-
ence to the medium employed in the course of it.
It may be asked, why, then, is money so generally preferred
to commodities, when the value on both sides is equal? This
requires a little explanation. When I come to treat of money,
it will be shown, that the coined metal of equal value com-
mands a preference, because it insures to the holder the at-
tainment of the objects of desire by means of one exchange
instead of two. He is not, like the holder of any other com-
modity, obliged, in the first instance, to exchange his own
commodity, money, for the purpose of obtaining, by a second
exchange, the object of his desire; one act of exchange suf-
fices; and this it is, combined with the extreme facility of
apportionment, afforded by graduated denominations of the
coin, which renders it so useful in exchanges of value. Every
individual, who has an exchange to make, becomes a con-
sumer of the commodity, money; that is to say, every indi-
vidual in the community; which accounts for the universal
preference of money to commodities at large, where the value
is equal.
In no one way do the causes, that influence individual prefer-
ence of money to commodities, operate upon international
commerce. When the nation has a smaller stock than its ne-
cessities require, its value within the nation is raised, and for-
eign and native merchants are equally interested in the im-
portation of more= when it is redundant, its relative value to
commodities at large is reduced, and it becomes advantageous
to export to that spot, where its command of commodities
may be greater than at home. To retain it by compulsory mea-
sures, is to force individuals to keep what is a burthen to
them. 154
64Book I= On Production
are now speaking of is not occasioned by the export, but by
the consumption, which might have taken place without any
export whatever. I may, therefore, say, with the strictest truth,
that the export of the specie has caused no loss at all to the
nation.
And here I might, perhaps, now dismiss the subject of the
balance of trade; but such is the prevailing ignorance on this
topic, and so novel are the views I have been taking, even to
persons of the better classes, to writers and statesmen of the
purest intentions and well informed on other points, that it
may be worth while to put the reader on his guard against
some fallacies which are often set up in opposition to liberal
principles, and are unfortunately the groundwork of the pre-
vailing policy of most of the European States. I shall uni-
formly reduce the objections to the simplest terms possible,
that their weight may be the more easily estimated.
It has been urged, with much confidence, that, had the export
of 20,000 dollars never been made, France would remain in
possession of that additional value; in fact, that the nation has
lost the amount twice over; first, by the act of export; sec-
ondly, by that of consumption= whereas, the consumption of
an indigenous product would have entailed a single loss only.
But I answer as before, that the export of specie has occa-
sioned no loss; that it was balanced by equivalent value im-
ported; and that it is so certain, that nothing has been lost
except the 20,000 dollars worth of imported commodities,
that I defy any one to point out any other losers than the con-
sumers of those commodities. If there has been no loser, it is
clear there can have been no loss.
It is said, that, by increasing the currency through the means
of a favourable balance of trade, the total capital of a nation
is augmented, and, on the contrary, by diminishing it, that
capital is reduced. Bul it must be always kept in mind, that
capital consists, not of so much silver or gold, but of the val-
ues devoted to reproductive consumption, which values nec-
essarily assume an infinite variety of successive forms. When
it is intended to vest a given capital in any concern, or to
place it out at interest, the first step is undoubtedly to realize
the amount, by converting 155 into ready money the different
values one has at command. The value of the capital, thus
assuming the transient form of money, is quickly transmuted
by one exchange after another into buildings, works, and per-
ishable substances requisite for the projected enterprise. The
ready money employed for the occasion passes again into
other hands, for the purpose of facilitating fresh exchanges,
as soon as it has accomplished its momentary duty; in like
manner as do many other substances, the shape of which this
capital successively assumes. So that the value of capital is
neither lost nor impaired by parting with its value, whatever
material shape it happens to be under, provided that we part
with it in a way that ensures its renovation.
Would you put a stop to the emigration of capital? It is not to
be prevented by keeping the specie in the country. A man
resolved to transfer his capital elsewhere can do it just as
effectually by the consignment of goods, whose export is per-
mitted. 156 So much the better, we may be told; for our manu-
facturers will benefit by the exports. True; but their value
exists no longer in the nation, since they bring back no return
wherewith to make new purchases; there has been a transfer
of so much capital from a/mongst you, to give activity not to
your own, but to some other nation’s industry. This is a real
ground of apprehension. Capital naturally flows to those places
that hold out security and lucrative employment, and gradu-
ally retires from countries offering no such advantages= but it
may easily enough retire, without being ever converted into
specie.
Suppose a French dealer in foreign commodities to consign
to a foreign country a capital of 10,000 dollars in specie for
the purchase of cotton; when his cotton arrives, he possesses
20,000 dollars value in cotton instead of specie, putting his
profit out of the question for the moment. Has anybody lost
this amount of specie? Certainly not= the adventurer has come
honestly by it. A cotton manufacturer gives cash for the cargo;
is he the loser of the price? No, surely= on the contrary, the
article in his hands will increase to twice its value, so as to
leave him a profit, after repaying all his advances. If no indi-
vidual capitalist has lost the 20,000 dollars exported, how
can the nation have lost them? The loss will fall on the con-
sumer, they will tell you= in fact, all the cotton goods bought
and consumed will be so much positive loss; but the same
consumers might have consumed linens or woollens of ex-
actly the same value, without one dollar of the 20,000 being
sent out of the country, and yet there would equally be a loss
or consumption to that amount of value. The loss of value we
If the export of specie causes no diminution of national capi-
tal, provided it be followed by a corresponding return, on the
other hand, its import brings no accession of capital. For, in
reality, before specie can be imported, it must have been pur-
chased by an equivalent value exported for that purpose.
On this point it has been alleged, that by sending abroad goods
instead of specie, a demand is created for goods, and the pro-
ducers enabled to make a profit upon their production. I an-
swer, that, even when specie is sent abroad, that specie must
have been first obtained by the export of some indigenous
product; for, we may rest assured, that the foreign owner of it
did not give it to the French importer for nothing; and France
had nothing to offer in the first instance but her domestic
products. If the supply of the precious metals in the country
be more than sufficient for the wants of the country, it is a
fitter object of export than another commodity; and, if more
65Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
pose national wealth; they are useful to the community no
longer than while they do not exceed the national demand for
them. Any such excess must make the sellers more numerous
than the buyers; consequently must depress the price in pro-
portion, and thus create a powerful inducement to buy in the
home market, in the expectation of making a profit upon the
export. This may be illustrated by an example.
of the specie be exported than the excess of the supply above
the demand for the purposes of circulation, we may calculate
with certainty, that, since the value of specie must have been
necessarily raised by the exportation, other specie will be
imported to replace what has been withdrawn; for the pur-
chase of which last, home products must have been sent
abroad, which will have yielded a profit to the home produc-
ers. In a word, every value sent out of France, for the pur-
chase of foreign returns for the French market, may be re-
solved into a product of domestic industry, given either first
or last, for France has nothing else to procure them with.
Suppose for a moment the internal traffic and national wealth
of a given country to be such as to require the constant em-
ploy of a thousand carriages of different kinds. Suppose, too,
that, by some peculiar system of commerce, we should suc-
ceed in getting more carriages annually imported, than were
annually destroyed by wear and tear; so that, at the year’s
end, there should be 1500 instead of 1000; is it not obvious,
that there would be in that case 500 lying by in the reposito-
ries quite useless, and that the owners of them, rather than
suffer their value to lie dormant, would undersell each other,
and even smuggle them abroad if it were practicable, in the
hope of turning them to better account? In vain would the
government conclude commercial treaties for the encourage-
ment of their import= in vain would it expend its efforts in
stimulating the export of other commodities, for the purpose
of getting returns in the shape of carriages; the more the pub-
lic authorities favoured the import, the more anxious would
individuals be to export.
Again, it has been argued, that it is better to export consum-
able articles, as, for instance, manufactures, and to keep at
home those products not liable to consumption, or, at least,
not to quick consumption, such as specie. Yet objects of quick
consumption, if more in demand, are more profitable to keep
than objects of slower consumption. It would often be doing
a producer a very poor service, to make him substitute a quan-
tity of commodities of slow consumption, for an equal por-
tion of his capital of more rapid consumption. If an ironmaster
were to contract for the delivery to him of a quantity of coal
at a day certain, and when the day came the coal could not be
procurable, and he should be offered the value in money in
its stead, it would be somewhat difficult to convince him of
the service done him by the delivery of money; which is an
object of much slower consumption than the coal he con-
tracted for. Should a dyer send an order for dying woods from
abroad, it would be a positive injury to send him gold, on the
plea, that, with equal value, it has the advantage of greater
durability. He had no occasion for a durable article whatever;
what he wanted was a substance, which, though decomposed
in his vats, would quickly re-appear in the colours of his
stuffs. 157
As it is with carriages, so is it with specie likewise. The de-
mand is limited; it can form but a part of the aggregate wealth
of the nation. That wealth can not possibly consist entirely of
specie; for other things are requisite besides specie. The ex-
tent of the demand for that peculiar article is proportionate to
the general wealth; in the same manner, as a greater number
of carriages is wanted in a rich than in a poor country. What-
ever brilliant or solid qualities the precious metals may pos-
sess, their value depends upon the use made of them, and that
use is limited. Like carriages, they have a value peculiar to
them; a value that diminishes in proportion to the increase of
their relative plenty, in comparison with the objects of ex-
change, and increases in proportion to their relative scarcity.
If it were no advantage to import any but the most durable
items of productive capital, there are other very durable ob-
jects, such as stone or iron, that ought to share in our partial-
ity with silver and gold. But the point of real importance is,
the durability, not of any particular substance, but of the value
of capital. Now the value of capital is perpetuated, notwith-
standing the repeated change of the material shape in which
it is vested. Nay, it cannot yield either interest or profit, un-
less that shape be continually varied. To confine it to the single
shape of money. would be to condemn it to remain unproduc-
tive.
One is told, that every thing may be procured with gold or
silver. True; but upon what terms? The terms are less advan-
tageous, when these metals are forcibly multiplied beyond
the demand; hence their strong tendency to emigration under
such circumstances. The export of silver from Spain was pro-
hibited; yet Spain supplied all Europe with it. In 1812, the
paper money of England having rendered superfluous all the
gold money of that country, and made that metal too abun-
dant for its other remaining uses, its relative value fell, and
her guineas emigrated to France, in spite of the ease with
which the coasts of an island may be guarded, and of the
denunciation of capital punishment against the exporters.
But I will go a step further, and, having shown that there is no
advantage in importing gold and silver more than any other
article of merchandise, I will assert, that, supposing it were
desirable to have the balance of trade always in our favour,
yet it is morally impossible it should be so. Gold and silver
are like all the other substances that, in the aggregate, com-
66Book I= On Production
To what good purpose, then, do governments labour to turn
the balance of commerce in favour of their respective na-
tions? To none whatever; unless, perhaps, to exhibit the show
of financial advantages, unsupported by fact or experience. 158
How can maxims so clear, so agreeable to plain common
sense, and to facts attested by all who have made commerce
their study, have yet been rejected in practice by all the ruling
powers of Europe, 159 nay, even have been attacked by a num-
ber of writers, that have evinced both genius and information
on other subjects? To speak the truth, it is because the first
principles of political economy are as yet but little known;
because ingenious systems and reasonings have been built
upon hollow foundations, and taken advantage of, on the one
hand, by interested rulers, who employ prohibition as a
weapon of offence or an instrument of revenue; and, on the
other, by the personal avarice of merchants and manufactur-
ers, who have a private interest in exclusive measures, and
take but little pains to inquire, whether their profits arise from
actual production, or from a simultaneous loss thrown upon
other classes of the community.
By the absolute exclusion of specific manufactures of for-
eign fabric, a government establishes a monopoly in favour
of the home producers of these articles, and in prejudice of
the home consumers; that is to say, those classes of the nation
which produce them, being entitled to their exclusive sale,
can raise their prices above the natural rate; while the home
consumers, being unable to purchase elsewhere, are compelled
to pay for them unnaturally dear. 161 If the articles be not wholly
prohibited, but merely saddled with an import duty, the home
producer can then increase their price by the whole amount
of the duty, and the consumer will have to pay the difference.
For example, if an import duty of 20 cents per dozen be laid
upon earthenware plates worth 60 cents per dozen, the im-
porter whatever country he may belong to, must charge the
consumer 30 cents; and the home manufacturer of that com-
modity is enabled to ask 80 cents per dozen of his customers
for plates of the same quality; which he could not do without
the intervention of the duty because the consumer could get
the same article for 60 cents= thus, a premium to the whole
extent of the duty is given to the home manufacturer out of
the consumer’s pocket.
A determination to maintain a favourable balance of trade,
that is to say, to export goods and receive returns of specie,
is, in fact, a determination to have no foreign trade at all; for
the nation, with whom the trade is to be carried on, can only
give in exchange what It has to give. If one party will receive
nothing but the precious metals, the other party may come to
a similar resolution; and, when both parties require the same
commodity, there is no possibility of any exchange. Were it
practicable to monopolize the precious metals, there are few
nations in the world that would not be cut off from all hope of
mutual commercial relations. If one country afford to another
what the latter wants in exchange, what more would she have?
or in what respect would gold be preferable? for what else
can it be wanted, than as the means of subsequently purchas-
ing the objects of desire?
Should any one maintain, that the advantage of producing at
home counterbalances the hardship of paying dearer for al-
most every article; that our own capital and labour are en-
gaged in the production, and the profits pocketed by our own
fellow-citizens; my answer is, that the foreign commodities
we might import are not to be had gratis= that we must pur-
chase them with values of home production, which would
have given equal employment to our industry and capital; for
we must never lose sight of this maxim, that products are
always bought ultimately with products. It is most for our
advantage to employ our productive powers, not in those
branches in which foreigners excel us, but in those which we
excel in ourselves; and with the product to purchase of oth-
ers. The opposite course would be just as absurd, as if a man
should wish to make his own coats and shoes. What would
the world say, if, at the door of every house an import duty
were laid upon coats and shoes, for the laudable purpose of
compelling the inmates to make them for themselves? Would
not people say with justice, Let us follow each his own pur-
suits, and buy what we want with what we produce, or, which
comes to the same thing, with what we get for our products.
The system would be precisely the same, only carried to a
ridiculous extreme.
The day will come, sooner or later, when people will wonder
at the necessity of taking all this trouble to expose the folly of
a system, so childish and absurd, and yet so often enforced at
the point of the bayonet. 160
[End of the digression upon the balance of trade.]
Well may it be a matter of wonder, that every nation should
manifest such anxiety to obtain prohibitory regulations, if it
be true that it can profit nothing by them; and lead one to
suppose the two cases not parallel, because we do not find
individual householders solicitous to obtain the same privi-
lege. But the sole difference is this, that individuals are inde-
pendent and consistent beings, actuated by no contrariety of
To resume our subject. — We have seen, that the very advan-
tages aimed at by the means of a favourable balance of trade,
are altogether illusory; and that, supposing them real, it is
impossible for a nation permanently to enjoy them. It remains
to be shown, what is the actual operation of regulations framed
with this object in view.

will, and more interested in their character of consumers of
coats and shoes to buy them cheap, than as manufacturers to
sell unnaturally dear.

objects of barren consumption, than that of raw materials for home manufacture. Whether the products consumed be of
domestic or of foreign growth, a portion of wealth is destroyed in the act of consumption, and a proportionate inroad made
into the wealth of the community. But that inroad is the result of the act of consumption, not of the act of dealing with the foreigner; and the resulting stimulus to national production, is the same in either case. For, wherewith was the purchase of the foreign product made? either with a domestic product or with money, which must itself have been procured with a domestic product. In buying of a foreigner, the nation really does no more than send abroad a domestic product in lieu of consuming it at home, and consume in its place the foreign product received in exchange. The individual consumer himself, probably, does not conduct this operation; commerce conducts it for him. No one country can buy of another, ex-
cept with its own domestic products.

Who, then, are the classes of the community so importunate for prohibitions or heavy import duties? The producers of
the particular commodity, that applies for protection from competition, not the consumers of that commodity. The pub-
lic interest is their plea, but self-interest is evidently their object. Well, but, say these gentry, are they not the same thing?

are not our gains national gains? By no means= whatever profit is acquired in this manner is so much taken out of the pockets of a neighbour and fellow-citizen and, if the excess of charge thrown upon consumers by the monopoly could be correctly computed, it would be found, that the loss of the consumer exceeds the gain of the monopolist. Here, then, individual and public interest are in direct opposition to each other; and, since public interest is understood by the enlightened few alone, is it at all surprising, that the prohibitive system should find so many partisans and so few opponents?

In defence of import duties it is often urged, “that when the interest of money is lower abroad than at home, the foreign
has an advantage over the home producer, which must be met by a countervailing duty.” The low rate of interest is, to the
foreign producer, an advantage, analogous to that of the superior quality of his land. It tends to cheapen the products he
raises; and it is reasonable enough that our domestic consumers should take the benefit of that cheapness. The same mo-
tive will operate here, that leads us rather to import sugar and
indigo from tropical climates, than to raise them in our own. 

There is in general far too little attention paid to the serious mischief of raising prices upon the consumers. 

The evil is not apparent to cursory observation, because it operates piecemeal, and is felt in a very slight degree on every purchase or
act of consumption= but it is really most serious, on account of its constant recurrence and universal pressure. 

The whole fortune of every consumer is affected by every fluctuation of price in the articles of his consumption; the cheaper they are, the richer he is, and tice versa. If a single article rise in price, he is so much the more poor in respect of that article; if all rise together, he is poorer in respect to the whole. And, since
the whole nation is comprehended in the class of the consumers, the whole nation must in that case be the poorer. Besides
which, it is crippled in the extension of the variety of its enjoyments, and prevented from obtaining products whereof it
stands in need, in exchange for those wherewith it might procure them. It is of no use to assert, that, when prices are raised, what one gains another loses. For the position is not true, except in the case of monopolies; nor even to the full extent with regard to them; for the monopolist never profits to the
full amount of the loss to the consumers. If the rise be occasioned by taxation or import-duty under any shape whatever,
the producer gains nothing by the in crease of price, but just the reverse, as we shall see by and by (Book 3 Chapter 7) so that, in fact, he is no richer in his capacity of producer, though poorer in his quality of consumer. This is one of the
most effective causes of national impoverishment, or at least one of the most powerful checks to the progress of national
wealth.

“But capital is necessary in every branch of production= so that the foreigner, who can procure it at a lower rate of interest, has the same advantage in respect to every product; and, if the free importation be permitted, he will have an advantage over all classes of home producers.” Tell me, then, how his products are to be paid for. “Why, in specie, and there lies the mischief.” 

How is the specie to be got to pay for them? 

“All the nation has, will go in that way; and when it is exhausted national misery will be complete.” So then it is
admitted, that before arriving at this extremity, the constant efflux of specie will gradually render it more scarce at home, and more abundant abroad; wherefore, it will gradually rise 1-3% higher in value at home than abroad; which is
fully sufficient to turn the tide, and make specie flow inwards faster than it flowed outwards. But it will not do so without some returns; and of what can the returns be made, but of
products of the land, or the commerce of the nation? 

There is no possible means of purchasing from foreign nations, otherwise than with the products of the national land and commerce. It is better to buy of them what they can produce cheaper than ourselves, because we may rest assured, that
they must take in payment what we can produce cheaper than they. This they must do, else there must be an end of all inter-change.

This is why it is an absurd distinction to view with more jealousy the import of foreign


in Book II. So that these latter classes participate in the loss
with consumers at large, but get no share of the unnatural
gains of their superiors. Prohibitory measures, besides affect-
ing the pockets of the consumers, often subject them to se-
vere privations. I am ashamed to say, that, within these few
years, we have had the hat-makers of Marseilles petitioning
for the prohibition of the import of foreign straw or chip hats,
on the plea that they injured the sale of their own felt hats; 163
a measure that would have deprived the country people and
labourers in husbandry, who are so much exposed to the sun,
of a light, a cool, and cheap covering, admirably adapted to
their wants, the use of which it was highly desirable to extend
and encourage.

Again, it is affirmed, and what absurd positions have not been
advanced to involve these questions in obscurity? that, since
almost all the nation are at the same time consumers and pro-
ducers, they gain by prohibition and monopoly as much in
the one capacity as they lose in the other; that the producer,
who gets a monopoly-profit upon the object of his own production, is, on the other hand, the sufferer by a similar profit
upon the objects of his consumption; and thus that the nation is made up of rogues and fools, who are a match or each
other. 

Everybody thinks him. self more rogue than fool; for, although all are consumers as well as producers, the enormous profits made upon a single article are much more striking, than reiterated minute losses
upon the numberless items of consumption. If an import duty be laid upon calicoes, the additional annual charge to each
person of moderate fortune, may, perhaps, not exceed 2½ dollars or 3 dollars at most; and probably he does not very
well comprehend the nature of the loss, or feel it much, though repeated in some degree or other upon every thing he con-
sumes; whereas, possibly, this consumer is himself a manufacturer, say a hat-maker; and should a duty be laid upon the
import of foreign hats, he will immediately see that it will raise the price of his own hats, and probably increase his an-
nual profits by several thousand dollars. It is this delusion that makes private interest so warm an advocate for prohibi-
tory measures, even where the whole community loses more by them as consumers, than it gains as producers.
In pursuit of what it mistakes for profound policy, or to gratify feelings it supposes to be laudable, a government will sometimes prohibit or divert the course of a particular trade, and thereby do irreparable mischief to the productive powers of the nation. 

When Philip 2nd became master of Portugal, and forbade all intercourse between his new subjects and the
Dutch, whom he detested, what was the consequence? 

The Dutch, who before resorted to Lisbon for the manufactures of India, of which they took off an immense quantity, finding
this avenue closed against their industry, went straight to India for what they wanted, and, in the end, drove out the Por-
tuguese from that quarter; and, what was meant as the deadly blow of inveterate hatred, turned out the main source of their
aggrandizement. “Commerce,” says Fenelon, “is like the native springs of the rock, which often cease to flow altogether,
if it be attempted to alter their course.” 164 

But, even in this point of view, the exclusive system is pregnant with injustice. It is impossible that every class of production should profit by the exclusive system, supposing it to be universal, which, in point of fact, it never is in practice, though possibly it may be in law or intention. 

Some articles can never, from the nature of things, be derived from abroad;
fresh fish, for instance, or horned cattle; as to them, therefore, import duties would be inoperative in raising the price.

The same may be said of masons and carpenters’ work, and of the numberless callings necessarily carried on within the community; as those of shopmen, clerks, carriers, retail dealers, and many others. The producers of immaterial products, public functionaries, and fundholders, lie under the same disability. These classes can none of them be invested with a monopoly by means of import duties, though they are subjected to the hardship of many monopolies granted in that
way to other classes of producers. 162

Such are the principal evils of impediments thrown in the way of import, which are carried to the extreme point by absolute prohibition. There have, indeed, been instances of nations that have thriven under such a system; but then it was,
because the causes of national prosperity were more powerful than the causes of national impoverishment. Nations resemble the human frame, which contains a vital principle, that incessantly labours to repair the inroads of excess and
dissipation upon its health and constitution. 

Nature is active in closing the wounds and healing the bruises inflicted by our own awkwardness and intemperance. In like manner, states maintain themselves, nay, often increase in prosperity, in spite of the infinite injuries of every description, which friends as well as enemies inflict upon them. And it is worth remarking, that the most industrious nations are those, which are the most subjected to such outrage, because none others could survive them. 

The cry is then “our system must be the true one, for the national prosperity is advancing.” Whereas, were we to
take an enlarged view of the circumstances, that, for the last three centuries, have combined to develop the power and faculties of man; to survey with the eye of intelligence the progress of navigation and discovery, of invention in every Besides, the profits of monopoly are not equitably divided amongst the different classes even of those that concur in the production of the commodity, which is the subject of monopoly. If the master-adventurers, whether in agriculture, manufacture, or commerce, have the consumers at their mercy, their labourers and subordinate productive agents are still more exposed to their extortion, for reasons that will be explained branch of art and science; to take account of the variety of useful animals and vegetables that have been transplanted from one hemisphere to the other, and to give a due attention to the vast augmentation and increased scope both of science and of its practical applications, that we are daily witnesses of, we could not resist the conviction, that our actual prosperity is nothing to what it might have been; that it is engaged in a perpetual struggle against the obstacles and impediments thrown into its way; and that, even in those parts of the world where mankind is deemed the most enlightened, a great part of their time and exertions are occupied in destroying instead of multiplying their resources, in despoiling instead of assisting each other; and all for want of correct knowledge and information respecting their real interests. 165
tion had well-nigh achieved. 

The frontier duties between Holland, Belgium, part of Germany, Italy, and France, were
demolished; and those of the other powers, with the exception of England, were far from oppressive. We may form some
estimate of the benefit thence resulting to commerce, from the discontent and stagnation that have ensued upon the establishment of the present system of lining the frontier of each state with a triple guard of douaniers. All the continental states so guarded have, indeed, preserved their former means of
production; but that production has been made less advantageous.

France has gained prodigiously by the suppression of the provincial barriers and custom-houses,
consequent upon her political revolution. Europe had, in like manner, gained by the partial removal of the international
barriers between its different political states; and the world at large would derive similar benefit from the demolition of
those, which insulate, as it were, the various communities, into which the human race is divided.

But, to return to the subject, we have just been examining, the nature of the injury that a community suffers by difficul-
ties thrown in the way of the introduction of foreign commodities. The mischief occasioned to the country that pro-
duces the prohibited article, is of the same kind and description; it is prevented from turning its capital and industry to
the best account. But it is not to be supposed that the foreign nation can by this means be utterly ruined and stripped of all resource, as Napoleon seemed to imagine, when he excluded the products of Britain from the markets of the continent. To
say nothing of the impossibility of effecting a complete and actual blockade of a whole country, opposed as it must be by
the universal motive of self-interest, the utmost effect of it can only be to drive its production into a different channel. 

A nation is always competent to the purchase and consumption of the whole of its own products, for products are always
bought with other products. Do you think it possible to prevent England from producing value to the amount of a mil-
lion, by preventing her export of woollens to that amount?

You are much mistaken if you do. England will employ the same capital and the same manual labour in the preparation
of ardent spirits, by the distillation of grain or other domestic products, that were before occupied in the manufacture of woollens for the French market, and she will then no longer bring her woollens to be bartered for French brandies. A country, in one way or other, direct or indirect, always consumes the values it produces, and can consume nothing more. If it cannot exchange its products with its neighbours, it is compelled to produce values of such kinds only as it can consume
at home. This is the utmost effect of prohibitions; both parties are worse provided, and neither is at all the richer.

The exclusive system has very serious evils such as smuggling. <!-- ; whereby an action, wholly innocent in itself, is made legally criminal= and persons, who are actually labouring for the general welfare, are subjected to punishment. -->

Smith admits of two circumstances, that, in his opinion, will justify a government in resorting to import-duties= —1. When
a particular branch of industry is necessary to the public security, and the external supply cannot be safely reckoned upon.

On this account a government may very wisely prohibit the import of gun-powder, if such prohibition be necessary to set
the powder-mills at home in activity; for it is better to pay somewhat dear for so essential an article, than to run the risk of being unprovided in the hour of need. 166 2. Where a similar commodity of home produce is already saddled with a
duty. The foreign article, if wholly exempt from duty, would in this case have an actual privilege; so that a duty imposed
has not the effect of destroying, but of restoring the natural equilibrium and relative position of the different branches of production. 

It is impossible to find any reasonable ground for exempting the production of values by the channel of external commerce from the same pressure of taxation that weighs upon the production effected in those of agricul-
ture and manufacture. 

Taxation is an evi and should be reduced to the lowest possible degree. But when once a given amount of taxation is admitted to be necessary, it is but common justice to lay it equally on all 3 branches of industry. The error I wish to expose to reprobation is the notion that taxes of this kind are favourable to Napoleon, doubtless, occasioned much injury, both to England and to the continent, by cramping their mutual relations of commerce as far as he possibly could. But, on the other hand, he did the continent of Europe the involuntary service of facilitating the communication between its different parts, by the universality of dominion, which his ambi-

production. A tax can never be favourable to the public welfare, except by the good use that is made of its proceeds. gland has done in relation to Portugal. In such case, it is mere
exaction and spoliation. 168

These points should never be lost sight of in the framing of
commercial treaties, which are really good for nothing but to
protect industry and capital, diverted into improper channels
by the blunders of legislation. These it would be far wiser to
remedy than to perpetuate. The healthy state of industry and
wealth is the state of absolute liberty, in which each interest
is left to take care of itself. The only useful protection author-
ity can afford them is that against fraud or violence. Taxes
and restrictive measures never can be a benefit= they are at
the best a necessary evil; to suppose them useful to the sub-
jects at large, is to mistake the foundation of national pros-
perity, and to set at naught the principles of political economy. Again, I would observe, that the offer of peculiar advantages by one nation to another, in the way of a treaty of commerce, if not an act of hostility, is at least one of extreme odium in the eyes of other nations. For the concession to one can only
be rendered effectual by refusal to others. 

Hence the germ of discord and of war, with all its mischiefs. It is infinitely more simple, and I hope to have shown, more profitable also, to treat all nations as friends, and impose no higher duties on
the introduction of their products, than what are necessary to
place them on the same footing as those of domestic growth.
Yet, notwithstanding all the mischiefs resulting from the ex-
clusion of foreign products, which I have been depicting, it
would be an act of unquestionable rashness suddenly to change
even so ruinous a policy. 

Disease is not to be eradicated in a moment; it requires nursing and management to dispense even
national benefits. Monopolies are an abuse, but an abuse in
which enormous capital is vested, and numberless industri-
ous agents employed, which deserve to be treated with con-
sideration; for this mass of capital and industry cannot all at
once find a more advantageous channel of national produc-
tion. Perhaps the cure of all the partial distresses that must
follow the downfall of that colossal monster in politics, the
exclusive system, would be as much as the talent of any single
statesman could accomplish; vet when one considers calmly
the wrongs it entails when it is established, and the distresses
consequent upon its overthrow, we are insensibly led to the
reflection, that, if it be so difficult to set shackled industry at
liberty again, with what caution ought we not to receive any
proposition for enslaving her!

Import duties and prohibitions have often been resorted to as a means of retaliation= ‘Your government throws impediments
in the way of the introduction of our national products= are not we, then, justified in equally impeding the introduction
of yours?” This is the favourite plea, and the basis of most commercial treaties; but people mistake their object= grant-
ing that nations have a right to do one another as much mischief as possible, which, by the way, I can hardly admit; I am
not here disputing their rights, but discussing their interests.

Undoubtedly, a nation that excludes you from all commercial intercourse with her, does you an injury; — robs you, as far
as in her lies, of the benefits of external commerce; if, therefore, by the dread of retaliation, you can induce her to abandon her exclusive measures, there is no question about the expediency of such retaliation, as a matter of mere policy.
But it must not be forgotten that retaliation hurts yourself as well as your rival; that it operates, not defensively against her selfish measures, but offensively against yourself; in the first instance, for the purpose of indirectly attacking her. 

The only point in question is this, what degree of vengeance you are
animated by, and how much will you consent to throw away
upon its gratification. 167 I will not undertake to enumerate all
the evils arising from treaties of commerce, or to apply the
principles enforced throughout this work to all the clauses
and provisions usually contained in them. I will confine my-
self to the remark, that almost every modern treaty of com-
merce has had for its basis the imaginary advantage and pos-
sibility of the liquidation of a favourable balance of trade by
an import of specie. If these turn out to be chimerical, whatever advantage may have resulted from such treaties must be
wholly referred to the additional freedom and facility of international communication obtained by them, and not at all
to their restrictive clauses or provisoes, unless either of the contracting parties has availed itself of its superior power, to exact conditions savouring of a tributary character; as En-
But governments have not been content with checking the
import of foreign products. In the firm conviction, that na-
tional prosperity consists in selling without buying, and blind
to the utter impossibility of the thing, they have gone beyond
the mere imposition of a tax or fine upon purchasing of for-
eigners, and have in many instances offered rewards in the
shape of bounties for selling to them.

This expedient has been employed to an extraordinary degree by the British government, which until recently always
evinced the greatest anxiety to enlarge the market for British commercial and manufactured produce. 169 It is obvious, that
a merchant, who receives a bounty upon export, can, without personal loss, afford to seal his goods in a foreign market at a lower rate than prime cost. In the pithy language of Smith,

“We cannot force foreigners to buy the goods of our own workmen, as we may our own countrymen; the next best ex-
pedient, it has been thought, therefore, is to pay them for buying.”

If a particular commodity, by the time it has reached the French market, costs the English exporter 20 dollars, his
trouble, &c. included, and the same commodity could be bought in France at the same or a less rate, there is nothing to
give him exclusive possession of the market. But if the British government pays a bounty of 2 dollars upon the export,
and thereby enables him to lower his demand from 20 to 18 dollars, he may safely reckon upon a preference. Yet what is
this but a free gift of two dollars from the British government to the French consumer?

The merchant has no objection to this mode of dealing; for his profits
are the same as if the French consumer paid the full value, or
cost price, of the commodity. The British nation is the loser
in this transaction, in the ratio of 10 per cent upon the French
consumption; and France remits in return a value of but 18
for what has cost $20.

it does, it merely receives with one hand and pays with the
other= let the duties be lowered to the whole amount of the
bounty, and production will stand precisely where it did be-
fore, with this difference in its favour, viz., that the state will
save the whole charge of management of the bounties, and
part of that of the duties.

Though bounties ate chargeable, and a dead loss to the gross
national wealth, there are cases in which it is politic to incur
that loss; 170 as when a particular product is necessary to pub-
lic security, and must be had at any rate, however extrava-
gant. Louis XIV, with a view to restore the marine of France,
granted a bounty of 1 dollar per ton upon every ship fitted out
in France. His object was to train up sailors. So likewise when
the bounty is the mere refunding of a duty previously ex-
acted. The bounty paid by Great Britain upon the export of
refined sugar is nothing more than the reimbursement of the
import duties upon muscovado and molasses.

When a bounty is paid, not at the moment of export, but at
the commencement of productive creation, the home con-
sumer participates with the foreigner in the advantage of the
bounty; for, in that case, the article can be sold below cost
price in the home as well as in the foreign market. And if, as
is sometimes the case, the producer pockets the bounty, and
yet keeps up the price of the commodity, the bounty is then a
present of the government to the producer, over and above
the ordinary profits of his industry.

Perhaps, too, it may be wise in a government to grant a pre-
mium on a particular product, which, though it make a loss in
the outset, holds out a fair prospect of profit in a few years’
time. Smith thinks otherwise= hear what he says on the sub-
ject. “No regulation of commerce can increase the quantity
of industry in any society, beyond what its capital can main-
tain. It can only divert a part of it into a direction, into which
it might not otherwise have gone; and it is by no means cer-
tain, that this artificial direction is likely to be more advanta-
geous to the society, than that into which it would have gone
of its own accord. The statesman, who should attempt to di-
rect private people in what manner they ought to employ their
capitals, would not only load himself with a most unneces-
sary attention, but assume an authority, which could safely be
trusted, not only to no single person, but to no council or
senate whatever; and which would nowhere be so dangerous,
as in the bands of a man who had folly and presumption
enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it. Though for want of
such regulations, the society should never acquire the pro-
posed manufacture, it would no, upon that account necessarily be the poorer in any one period of its duration. In every
period of its duration, its whole capital and industry might still have been employed, though upon different objects, in
the manner that was most advantageous at the time.” 171 

When, by the means of a bounty, a product is raised either for home or foreign consumption, which would not have been
raised without one, the effect is, an injurious production, one that costs more than it is worth. Suppose an article, when
completely finished off, to be saleable for 5 dollars and no more, but its prime cost, including of course the profits of
productive industry, to amount to 6 dollars, it is quite clear that nobody will volunteer the production, for fear of a loss of 1 dollar. 

But, if the government, with a view to encourage this branch of industry, be willing to defray this loss in other
words, if it offer a bounty of 1 dollar to the producer, the production can then go on, and the public revenue, that is to
say, the nation at large, will be a loser of 1 dollar. 

This is precisely the kind of advantage that a nation gains by encouraging a branch of production which cannot support itself= it is in fact urging the prosecution of a losing concern, the produce of which is exchanged, not for other produce, but for
the bounty given by the state.

Smith is certainly right, though perhaps there are circumstances that may form exceptions to the general
rule, that every one is the best judge how to employ his industry and capital. Smith wrote at a period and in a country,
where personal interest is well understood, and where any profitable mode of investing capital and industry is not likely
to be long overlooked. But every nation is not so far advanced in intelligence. How many countries are there, where many
of the best employments of capital are altogether excluded Wherever there is any thing to be made by a particular em-
ployment of industry, it wants no encouragement; where there is nothing to be made, it deserves none. There is no truth in
the argument, that perhaps the state may gain, though individuals cannot; for how can the state gain, except through the
medium of individuals? Perhaps it may be said, that the state receives more in duties than it pays in bounties; but suppose



Section 2= The Effect of Regulations fixing the Manner of Production.

by prejudices that the government alone can remove! How
many cities and provinces, where certain established invest-
ments of capital have prevailed from time immemorial! In
one place, every body invests in landed property, in another,
in houses, and in others still, in public offices or national funds.
Every unusual application of the power of capital is, in such
places, contemplated with distrust or disdain; so that partial-
ity shown to a profitable mode of employing industry or capital
may possibly be productive of national advantage.
The interference of the public authority, with regard to the
details of agricultural production, has generally been of a
beneficial kind. The impossibility of intermeddling in the
minute and various details of agriculture, the vast number of
agents it occupies, often widely separated in locality and pur-
suits, from the largest farming concerns to the little garden of
the cottager, the small value of the produce in comparison
with its volume, are so many obstacles that nature has placed
in the way of authoritative restraint and interference. All gov-
ernments, that have pretended to the least regard for the pub-
lic welfare, have consequently confined themselves to the
granting of premiums and encouragements, and to the diffu-
sion of knowledge which has often contributed largely to the
progress of this art. The veterinary college of Alfort, the ex-
perimental farm of Ramboullet, the introduction of the Me-
rino breed, are real benefits to the agriculture of France, the
enlargement and perfection of which she owes to the provi-
dence of the different rulers that her political troubles have
successively brought into power.

Moreover, a new channel of industry may ruin an unsupported
speculator, though capable of yielding enormous profit, when
the labourers shall have acquired practice, and the novelty
has once been overcome. France at present contains the most
beautiful manufactures of silk and of woollen in the world,
and is probably indebted for them to the wise encouragement
of Colbert’s administration. He advanced to the manufactur-
ers 2000 fr. for every loom at work; and, by the way, this
species of encouragement has a very peculiar advantage. In
ordinary cases, whatever the government levies upon the prod-
uct of individual exertion is wholly lost to future production;
but, in this instance, a part was employed in reproduction; a
portion of individual revenues was thrown into the aggregate
productive capital of the nation. This was a degree of wis-
dom one could hardly have expected, even from personal self-
interest. 172173

A national administration that guards with vigilance the fa-
cility of communication and the quiet prosecution of the
labours of husbandry, or punishes acts of culpable negligence,
as the destroying of caterpillars 174 and other noxious insects,
does a service analogous to the preservation of civil order
and of property, without which production must cease altogether.

It would be out of place here to inquire, how wide a field
bounties open to peculation, partiality, and the whole tribe of
abuses incident to the management of public affairs. The most
enlightened statesman is often obliged to abandon a scheme
of evident public utility, by the unavoidable defects and abuses
in the execution. Among these, one of the most frequent and
prominent is, the risk of paying a premium, or granting a favour
to the pretensions, not of merit, but of importunity. In other
respects, I have no fault to find with the honours, or even
pecuniary rewards publicly given to artists or mechanics, in
recompense of some extraordinary achievement of genius or
address. Rewards of this kind excite emulation, and enlarge
the stock of general knowledge, without diverting industry or
capital from their most beneficial channels. Besides, they cost
nothing in comparison of bounties of another description. The
bounty on the export of wheat has, by Smith’s account, cost
England in some years as much as a million and a half of
dollars. I do not believe that the British or any other govern-
ment ever spent the fiftieth part of that sum upon agriculture
in any one year.
The regulations relative to the felling of trees in France, how-
ever indispensable for the preservation of their growth, at
least in many of their provisions, appear in others rather to
operate as a discouragement of that branch of cultivation,
which, though particularly adapted to certain soils and sites,
and conducive to the attraction of atmospheric moisture, yet
seems to be daily on the decline.
But there is no branch of industry that has suffered so much
from the officious interference of authority in its details, as
that of manufacture.

Much of that interference has been directed towards limiting
the number of producers, either by confining them to one
trade exclusively, or by exacting specific terms, on which they
shall carry on their business. This system gave rise to the
establishment of chartered companies and incorporated trades.
The effect is always the same, whatever be the means em-
ployed. An exclusive privilege, a species of monopoly, is cre-
ated, which the consumer pays for, and of which the privi-
leged persons derive all the benefit. The monopolists can pros-
ecute their plans of self-interest with so much the more ease

such as would never be disposed to take in either their own
countrymen or foreigners? We are told that this system facili-
tates the enforcement of regulations for the warranty and veri-
fication of the quality of products; but are not such regula-
tions illusory in practice, even under the corporate system?
and, supposing them absolutely necessary, is there no more
simple way of enforcing them?

and concert, because they have legal meetings and a regular organization. At such meetings, the prosperity of the corporation is mistaken for that of commerce and of the nation at
large; and the last thing considered is, whether the proposed advantages be the result of actual new production, or merely
a transfer from one pocket to another, from the consumers to the privileged producers. This is the true reason why those
engaged in any particular branch of trade are so anxious to have themselves made the subject of regulation; and the public authorities are commonly, on their part, very ready to indulge them in what offers so fair an opportunity of raising a revenue.

Neither will the length of apprenticeship be a better guaran-
tee of the perfection of the work; the only thing to be de-
pended upon for that perfection is the skill of the workman,
and that is best attained by paying him in proportion to his
superiority. “To teach any young man,” says Smith, “in the
completest manner how to apply the instruments, and how to
construct the machines of the common mechanic trades, can-
not well require the lessons of more than a few weeks, per-
haps those of a few days might be sufficient. The dexterity of
hand, indeed, even in common trades, cannot be acquired
without much practice and experience, but a young man would
practise with much more diligence and attention, if from the
beginning he wrought as a journeyman, being paid in propor-
tion to the little work which he could execute, and paying in
his turn for the materials which he might sometimes spoil
through awkwardness and inexperience.” 176

Moreover, arbitrary regulations are extremely flattering to the
vanity of men in power, as giving them an air of wisdom and
foresight, and confirming their authority, which seems to de-
rive additional importance from the frequency of its exer-
cise. There is, per. haps, at this time, no country in Europe
where a man is free to dispose of his industry and capital in
what manner he pleases; in most places he cannot even change
his occupation or place of residence at pleasure. It is not
enough for a man to have the necessary qualifications of abil-
ity and inclination to become a manufacturer or dealer in the
woollen or silk line, in spirits or calicoes; he must besides
have served his time, or been admitted to the freedom of the
craft. 175 Freedoms and apprenticeships are likewise expedi-
ents of police, not of that wholesome= branch of police, whose
object is the maintenance of public and private security, and
which is neither costly nor vexatious; but of that sort of po-
lice which bad governments employ to preserve or extend
their personal authority at any expense. By the dispensation
of honorary or pecuniary advantages, authority can generally
influence the chiefs and superiors it has appointed to the cor-
porations, who think to earn those honours and emoluments
by their subservience to the power that confers them. These
are the ready tools, for the management of the body at large,
and volunteer to denounce the individuals, whose firmness
may be formidable, and report those whose servility may be
reckoned upon, and all under the pretext of public good. Of-
ficial harangues and public addresses are; never wanting in
plausible reasons for the continuance of old restrictions on
liberty of action, or for the establishment of new ones; for
there is no cause so bad as to be without some argument or
other in its favour.

Were apprentices bound out a year later, and the interval spent
in schools conducted on the plan of mutual instruction, I can
hardly think the products would be worse executed; and, be-
yond all doubt, the labouring class would be advanced a stage
in civilization.

Were apprenticeships a sure means of obtaining a greater
perfection of products, those of Spain would be as good as
those of Britain. It was not before incorporated trades and
compulsory apprenticeships had been abolished in France,
that she attained that superiority of execution she has now to
boast of.

Perhaps there is no one mechanic art nearly so difficult as
that of the gardener or field labourer; yet this is almost the
only one that has nowhere been subjected to apprenticeship.
Are vegetables and fruits produced in less abundance or
perfection?,Were cultivators a corporate body, I suppose it
would soon be asserted, that high-flavoured peaches and
white-heart lettuces could not be raised without a code of
some hundred well penned articles.

The chief advantage, and= the one most relied upon, is, the
insurance of a more perfect execution of the products raised
for consumption, and of a superiority in them highly favourable to the national commerce, and calculated to secure the continued demand of foreigners. But does this advantage result from the system in question? What security is
there that the corporate body itself will always be composed
of men not merely of integrity, but of scrupulous delicacy,
After all, regulations of this nature, even admitting their util-
ity, must be nugatory as soon as evasion is allowed; now it is
notorious that there is no manufacturing towns where money
will not purchase exemption. So that they are more than merely
useless as a warranty of quality; inasmuch as they are the
engine of the mos, odious injustice and extortion.


in the rest of the city, which was subject to those institutions
that are held up as so indispensable? For a very simple reason= because self-interest is the best of all instructors.
In support of these opinions, the advocates for the corporate
sys tem appeal to the example of Great Britain, where industry is well-known to be greatly shackled, and yet manufactures prosper. 

But in this they expose their ignorance of the
real causes of that prosperity.’These causes,” Smith tells us,
“seem to be the general liberty of trade, which, notwithstand-
ing some restraints, is at least equal, perhaps superior, to what
it is in any other country; the liberty of exporting, duty free,
almost all sorts of goods, which are the produce of domestic
industry, to almost any foreign country and, what perhaps is
of still greater importance, the unbounded liberty of trans-
porting them from any one part of our own country to any
other, without being obliged to give any account to any pub-
lic office, without being liable to question or examination of
any kind,” &c. 177 Add to these, the complete inviolability of
all property whatever, either by public or private attack, the
enormous capital accumulated by her industry and frugality,
and lastly, the habitual exercise of attention and judgment, to
which her population is trained from the earliest years; and
there is no need of looking farther for the causes of the manufacturing prosperity of Britain.

An example or two will serve better than all reasoning in the
world, to show the impediments thrown in the way of the
development of industry by incorporations of trades and crafts.
Argand, the inventor of the lamps that go by his name, and
yield, at the same expense, triple the amount of light, was
dragged before the Parlement de Paris, by the company of
tinmen, locksmiths, ironmongers, and journeymen farriers,
who claimed the exclusive right of making lamps. 180 Lenoir,
the celebrated Parisian philosophical and mathematical in-
strument maker, had set up a small furnace for the conve-
nience of working the metals used in his business. The syndics
of the founders’ company came in person to demolish it; and
he was obliged to apply to the king for protection. Thus was
talent dependent upon court favour. The manufacture of ja-
panned hard ware was altogether excluded from France until
the era of the revolution, by the circumstance of its requiring
the skill and implements of many different trades, and the
necessity of being admitted to the freedom of them all, be-
fore an individual could carry it on. It would be easy to fill a
volume with the recapitulation of the disheartening vexations
that personal industry had to encounter in the city of Paris
alone, under the corporate system; and another with that of
the successful efforts made, since that system was abolished
by the revolution.

Those who cite her example in justification of their desire to
enthral the exertions of industry, are not perhaps aware that
the most thriving towns in that kingdom, those on which her
character for manufacturing pre-eminence is mainly built, are
the very places where there are no incorporations of crafts
and trades; Manchester, Birmingham, and Liverpool, 178 were
mere villages a century or two ago, but now rank in point of
wealth and population next to London, and much before York,
Canterbury, and even Bristol, cities of the greatest antiquity
and privileges, and the capitals of her most thriving provinces, but still subjected to the shackles of these Gothic institutions. “The town and parish of Halifax,” says Sir John Nickols, 179 a writer of acknowledged local information, “has,
within these forty years, seen the number of its inhabitants
quadrupled= whilst many other towns, subjected to corporations, have experienced a sensible diminution of theirs. 

Houses
situated within the precincts of the city of London hardly find
tenants, and numbers of them remain empty; whilst Westminster, Southwark, and the other suburbs are continually increasing. These suburbs are free, whilst London sup-
ports within itself four-score and twelve exclusive companies of all kinds, of which we may see the members annually
adorn, with a silly pageantry, the tumultuous triumphal procession of the Lord Mayor.”

For the same reason that the free suburb of a chartered town,
or a free town in the midst of a country embarrassed by the
officiousness of a meddling government, will exhibit an un-
usual degree of prosperity, a nation that enjoys the freedom
of industry, in the midst of others following the corporate
system, would probably reap similar advantages. Those have
thriven the most, that have been the least shackled by the
observance of formalities, provided, of course, that individu-
als be secured from the exactions of power, the chicanery of
law, and the attempts of dishonesty or violence. Sully, whose
whole life was spent in the study and practice of measures for
improving the prosperity of France, entertained this opinion. 181
In his memoirs, he notices the multiplicity of useless laws
and ordinances, as a direct barrier to the national progress. 182
It may, perhaps, be alleged, that, were all occupations quite
free, a large proportion of those who engaged in them would
fall a sacrifice to the eagerness of competition. Possibly they
might, in some few instances, although it is not very likely
there should be a great excess of candidates in a line, that
held out but little prospect of gain; yet, admitting the casual
occurrence of this evil, it would be of infinitely less magni-
tude, than permanently keeping up the prices of produce at a
The prodigious manufacturing activity of some of the sub-
urbs of Paris is notorious; of the Faubourg St. Antoine, in
particular, where industry enjoyed many exemptions. Some
products were made nowhere else. How happened it, that
without apprenticeships, or the necessity of being free of the
craft, the manufacturer acquired a greater degree of skill, than
75Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
spondence with the sample of conditions, express or implied,
must be rigidly enforced, and government should meddle with
production no further. I would wish to impress upon my read-
ers, that the mere interference is itself an evil, even where it
is of use= 184 first, because it harasses and distresses individu-
als; and, secondly, because it costs money, either to the na-
tion, if it be defrayed by government, that is to say, charged
upon the public purse, or to the consumer, if it be charged
upon the specific article; in the latter case, the charge must of
course enhance the price, thereby laying an additional tax
upon the home consumer, and pro tanto discouraging the foreign demand.

rate that must limit its consumption, and abridge the power
of purchasing in the great body of. consumers.
If the measures of authority, levelled against the free disposi-
tion of each man’s respective talents and capital, are criminal
in the eye of sound policy, it is still more difficult to justify
them upon the principles of natural right. “The patrimony of
a poor man,” says the author of the Wealth of Nations, “lies in
the strength and dexterity of his hands= and to hinder him
from employing this strength and dexterity in what manner
he thinks proper, without injury tc his neighbour, is a plain
violation of his most sacred property.”

If interference be an evil, a paternal government will be most
sparing of its exercise. It will not trouble itself about the cer-
tification of such commodities, as the purchaser must under-
stand better than itself; or of such as cannot well be certified
by its agents; for, unfortunately, a government must always
reckon upon the negligence, incapacity, and misconduct of
its retainers. But some articles may well admit of certifica-
tion; as gold and silver, the standard of which can only be
ascertained by a complex operation of chemistry, which few
purchasers know how to execute, and which, if they did, would
cost them infinitely more than it can be executed for by the
government in their stead.

However, as society is possessed of a natural right to regulate
the exercise of any class of industry, that without regulation
might prejudice the rest of the community, physicians, sur-
geons, and apothecaries, are with perfect justice subjected to
an examination into their professional ability. The lives of
their fellow-citizens are dependent upon their skill, and a test
of that skill may fairly be established; but. it does not seem
advisable to limit the number of practitioners nor the plan of
their education. Society has no interest further than to ascer-
tain their qualification.

On the same grounds, regulation is useful and proper, when
aimed at the prevention of fraud or contrivance, manifestly
injurious to other kinds of production, or to the public safety,
and not at prescribing the nature of the products and the meth-
ods of fabrication. Thus, a manufacturer must not be allowed
to advertise his goods to the public as of better than their
actual quality= the home consumer is entitled to the public
protection against such a breach of faith; and so, indeed, is
the mercantile character of the nation, which must suffer in
the estimation and demand of foreign customers from such
practices. And this is an exception to the general rule, that the
best of all guarantees is the personal interest of the manufac-
turer. For, possibly, when about to give up business, he may
find it answer to increase his profit by a breach of faith, and
sacrifice a future object he is about to relinquish for a present
benefit. A fraud of this kind ruined the French cloths in the
Levant market, about the year 1783; since when the German
and British have entirely supplanted them. 183 We may go still
further. An article often derives a value from the name, or
from the place of its manufacture. When we judge from long
experience, that cloths of such a denomination, and made at
such a place, will be of a certain breadth and substance, it is a
fraud to fabricate, under the same name and at the same place,
a commodity of inferior substance and quality to the ordinary
standard, and thus to send it into the world under a false certificate.

In Great Britain, the individual inventor of a new product or
of a new process may obtain the exclusive right to it, by ob-
taining what is called a patent. While the patent remains in
force, the absence of competitors enables him to raise his
price far above the ordinary return of his outlay with interest,
and the wages of his own industry. Thus he receives a pre-
mium from the government, charged upon the consumers of
the new article; and this premium is often very large, as may
be supposed in a country so immediately productive as Great
Britain, where there are consequently abundance of affluent
individuals, ever on the look-out for some new object of en-
joyment. Some years ago a man invented a spiral or worm
spring for insertion between the leather braces of carriages,
to ease their motion, and made his fortune by the patent for
so trifling an invention.

Privileges of this kind no one can reasonably object to; for
they neither interfere with, nor cramp any branch of industry,
previously in operation. Moreover, the expense incurred is
purely voluntary; and those who choose to incur it, are not
obliged to renounce the satisfaction of any previous wants,
either of necessity or of amusement.

However, as it is the duty of every government to aim at the
constant amelioration of its subjects’ condition, it cannot de-
prive other producers to eternity of the right to employ part
of their industry and capital in this particular channel, which
Hence we may form an opinion of the extent to which gov-
ernment may carry its interference with benefit. The corre-

times fixed by the government itself, which thus assigns a
limit to the partiality it exercises towards the producers, and
the injustice it practises upon the consumers= otherwise, the
avarice of the privileged company would be bounded only by
the dread of losing more by the reduction of the. gross amount
of its sales, in consequence of increased prices, than it would
gain by their unnatural elevation. At all events, the consumer
pays for the commodity more than its worth; and government
generally contrives to share in the profits of the monopoly.
perhaps they might sooner or later have themselves discov-
ered, or preclude the consumer for a very long period from
the advantages of a competition price. Foreign nations being
out of its jurisdiction, would of course grant no privilege to
the inventor, and would, therefore, in this particular, during
the operation of the patent, be better off than the nation where
the invention originated.

France 185 has imitated the wise example of England, in as-
signing a limit to the duration of these patent rights, after
which the invention is free for all the world to avail them-
selves of. It is also provided, that, if the process be capable of
concealment, it shall be divulged at the expiration of the term.
And the patentee, who in this case, it may be supposed, could
do without the patent, has this advantage= that if his secret be
discovered by any body in the interim, it cannot be made
available till the expiration of the term.

It has been said, for the most ruinous expedient is sure to find
some plausible argument or other to support it, that the com-
merce with certain nations requires precautionary measures,
which privileged companies only can enforce. At one time
the plea is, that forts must be built, and marine establishments
kept up; as if in truth it were worth while to traffic sword in
hand, or an army were necessary to protect plain dealing; or
as if the state did not already maintain at great charge a mili-
tary force for the protection of its subjects! At another, that
diplomatic address is indispensable. The Chinese, for instance,
are a people so bigoted to form and prone to suspicion — so
entirely independent of other nations, by reason of their re-
mote position, the extent of their territory, and the peculiar
character of their wants, that is a matter of special and pre-
carious favour to be allowed to deal with them. We must,
therefore, elect either to go without their teas, silks, and
nankeens, or be content to submit tc precautions, which can
alone insure the continuance of the trade; for the dealings of
individuals might endanger the continuance of that good
humour, without which the mutual intercourse of the two na-
tions would be at an end.

Nor is it at all necessary that the government should inquire
into the novelty or utility of the invention; for, if it be useless,
so much the worse for the inventor, and, if it be already known,
every body is competent to plead and prove that fact, and the
previous right of the public; so that the only sufferer is the
inventor, who has been at the expense of a patent for nothing.
Thus the public is no loser by this species of encouragement,
but, on the contrary, may derive prodigious advantage.
The regulations tending to direct either the object or the
method of production, which have been above observed upon,
by no means comprise all the measures adopted by different
nations with those views. Indeed, were I to specify them all,
my catalogue would soon be incomplete; for new ones are
every day brought into practice. The great point is, to lay
down certain principles, that may enable us beforehand to
judge of their consequences. But there are two other branches
of commerce, that have been the subject of more than usual
regulation, and are, therefore, worthy of more special inves-
tigation. I shall devote the two succeeding sections to their
exclusive examination.

But, let me ask, is it so certain that the agents of a company,
who are too apt to presume upon the support of the military
power, either of the nation or at least of the company,-is it
quite certain, that such agents are more likely to keep alive an
amicable feeling than private traders, in whom more defer-
ence to local institutions might be expected, and who would
have an immediate interest in keeping clear of any misunder-
standing that should endanger both their persons and their
property? 186

But, supposing the worst that could happen, and granting, for
argument’s sake, that the trade with China can not be con-
ducted otherwise than by a privileged company, does it fol-
low, that with out one we must needs give up the taste for
Chinese productions? Certainly not. The trade in Chinese
goods will always exist, for this plain reason, that it suits both
parties, the Chinese and their customers. But shall we not~pay
dearer for those goods? There is no ground for thinking so.
Three-fourths of the European states have never sent a single
ship to China, and yet are abundantly supplied with teas, with
silks, and with nankeens, and that too at a very cheap rate.


Section 3= Privileged Trading Companies.

A government sometimes grants to individual merchants, and
much oftener to trading companies, the exclusive privilege
of buying and selling specific articles, tobacco for example;
or of trafficking with a particular country, as with India.
The privileged traders, being thus exempted from all compe-
tition by the exertion of the public authority, can raise their
prices above the level that could be maintained under the op-
eration of a free trade. This unnatural ratio of price is some-


There is another argument of more general application, and
still more frequently urged; viz. that a company, having the
exclusive trade of any given country, is exempt from the ef-
fects of competition, and, therefore, buys at a less price. But,
in the first place, it is not true that the exclusive privilege
exempts from the effect of competition= the only competition
it removes, is that of the national traders, which would be of
the utmost benefit to the nation; but it excludes neither the
competition of foreign companies, nor of foreign private trad-
ers. In the next place, there are many articles that would not
rise in price in consequence of the competition, which some
people affect to be alarmed at, though in truth it is a mere
bugbear.
own price, and can command the market, especially if it be
attentive to keep the market always understocked, as the En-
glish call it; that is, if the supply be just so far short of the
demand, as to keep alive the competition of purchasers. 187
In this manner, trading companies not only extort exorbitant
profits from the consumer, but moreover saddle him with all
the fraud and mismanagement inseparable from the conduct
of these unwieldy bodies, with their cumbrous organisation
of directors and factors without end, dispersed from one ex-
tremity of the globe to the other. The only check to the gross
abuses of these privileged bodies is the smuggling or contra-
band trade, which, in this point of view, may lay claim to
some degree of utility.

Suppose Marseilles, Bordeaux, L’Orient, were all to fit out
vessels to bring tea from China, we have no reason to believe
that all their ventures together would import more tea into
France, than France could consume or dispose of. All we have
to fear is, that they should not import enough. Now, if they
were to import no more than other merchants would have
imported for them, the demand for tea in China will have
been just the same in both cases; consequently, the commod-
ity will not have become more scare there. Our merchants
would hardly have to pay dearer for it, unless the price should
rise in China itself; and what sensible effect could the pur-
chases of a few merchants of France have upon the price of
an article consumed in China itself, to one hundred times the
amount of the whole consumption of Europe?

This analysis brings us to the point in question; are the gains
of the privileged company, national gains? Undoubtedly not;
for they are wholly taken from the pockets of the nation it-
self. The whole excess of value, paid by the consumer, be-
yond the rate at which free trade could afford the article, is
not a value produced, but so much existing value presented
by the government to the trader at the consumer’s expense. It
will probably be urged, that it must at least be admitted, that
this profit remains and is spent at home. Granted. but by whom
is it spent? that is the point. Should one member of a family
possess himself of the whole family income, dress himself in
fine clothes, and devour the best of every thing, what conso-
lation would it be to the rest of the family, were he to say,
what signifies it whether you or I spend the money? the income spent is the same, so it can make no difference.

But, granting that European competition. would operate to
raise the price of some commodities in the eastern market, is
that a sufficient motive for excepting the trade to that part of
the world from the general rules that are acted upon in all
other branches of commerce? Are we to invest an exclusive
company with the sole conduct of the import or export trade
between Germany and France, for the sole purpose of getting
our cottons and woollens from Germany at a cheaper rate? If
the commerce of the East were put upon the same footing as
foreign trade in general, the price of any one article of its
produce could never long remain much above the cost of pro-
duction in Asia; for the rise of price would operate as a stimu-
lus to increased production, and the competition of sellers
would soon be on a par with that of purchasers.

The exclusive as well as excessive profits of monopoly would
soon glut the privileged companies with wealth, could they
depend upon the good management of their concerns; but the
cupidity of agents, the long pendency of distant. adventures,
the difficulty of bringing factors abroad to account, and the
incapacity of those interested, are causes of ruin in constant
activity. Long and delicate operations of commerce require
superior exertion and intelligence in the parties interested.
And how can such qualities be expected in shareholders,
amounting sometimes to several hundreds, all of them hav-
ing other matters of more personal importance to look af-
ter? 188

But, admitting the advantage of buying cheap to be as sub-
stantial as it is represented, the nation at large has a right to
participate ir that cheapness; the home consumers ought to
buy cheap as well as the company. Whereas in practice it is
just the reverse, and, for a very simple reason= the company
is not exempt from competition as a purchaser, for other na-
tions are its competitors= but as a seller it is exempt; for the
rest of the nation can buy the articles it deals in nowhere else,
the import by foreigners being wholly prohibited. It asks its
Such are the consequences of privileges granted to trading
companies= and these consequences, it must be observed, are
in the nature of things inseparable; circumstances may re-
duce their efficacy, but can never remove them altogether.
The English East India Company has met with more success
than the three or four French ones that at different times made
the experiment. 189 This company is sovereign as well as mer-
chant; and we know, by experience, that the most detestable


joyed at all, or have enjoyed at a still dearer rate. But such
grants should, like patents, be limited to such duration only,
as will repay and fully indemnify the adventurers for the ad-
vances and risk incurred. Any thing further is a mere free gift
to the company, at the expense of the nation at large, who
have a natural right to get what they want wherever they can,
and at the lowest possible price.
governments may last for several generations; witness that of
the Mamelukes in Egypt. 190


There are some minor evils also incident to commercial privi-
leges. The grant of exclusive rights frequently exiles from a
country a branch of industry and a portion of capital that would
readily have taken root there, but are compelled to settle
abroad. Towards the close of the reign of Louis XIV the French
East India Company, being unable to support itself, notwith-
standing its exclusive rights, transferred the exercise of its
privileges to some speculators at St. Malo, in consideration
of a small share in their profits. The trade began to revive
under the influence of this comparative liberty, and would,
on the expiration of the company’s charter, in 1714, have been
as active as the then melancholy condition of France would
have permitted= but the company petitioned for a renewal,
and obtained one, pending the ventures of some private trad-
ers. Soon afterwards, a vessel of St. Malo, commanded by a
Breton of the name of Lamerville, appeared upon the French
coast, on its return from the East Indies, but was refused per-
mission to enter the harbour, on the plea, that it was in con-
travention of the company’s rights. Consequently, he was
compelled to prosecute his voyage to the nearest port in Bel-
gium, and carried his vessel into Ostend, where he disposed
of the cargo. The governor of the Low Countries, hearing of
the enormous profits he had made, proposed to the captain a
second voyage, with a squadron to be fitted out for the ex-
press purpose; and Lamerville afterwards performed many
similar voyages for different employers, and laid the founda-
tion of the Ostend Company. 191


What has been said with respect to commercial is equally
applicable to manufacturing privileges. The reason why gov-
ernments are so easily entrapped into measures of this kind
is, partly because they see a statement of large profits, and do
not trouble themselves to inquire whence they are derived;
and partly because this apparent profit is easily reduced to
numerical calculation, no matter whether wrong or right, cor-
rect or incorrect; whereas the loss and mischief resulting to
the nation are infinitely subdivided amongst the members of
the community, and operate after all in a very indirect, com-
plex, and general way,.so as to escape and defy calculation.
Some writers maintain arithmetic to be the only sure guide in
political economy; for my part, I see so many detestable sys-
tems built upon arithmetical statements, that I am rather in-
clined to regard that science as the instrument of national
calamity.



Section 6= Regulations affecting the Corn Trade.

The general principles which govern the commerce of all other commodities, should be equally applicable to the commerce of grain. But grain, or whatever else may happen to be the staple article of human subsistence to any people, deserves more particular notice.

Thus, the French consumer must necessarily have suffered by this monopoly= and so, in fact, he did. But, at any rate, it
will be supposed, the company must have benefited. Just the contrary= the company was itself ruined; in spite of the mo-
nopoly of tobacco, the lotteries, and other subsidiary grants bestowed on them by the government. 192 “In short,” says
Voltaire, 193 “all that remained to France in the East was the regret of having, in the course of forty years, squandered enormous sums, to bolster up a company that never made a sixpence profit, never made any dividend from the resources of
its commerce, either to its share-holders or creditors; and supported its establishments in India, solely by the underhand
practice of pillage and extortion upon the natives.”

Populations increase in proportion to the supply of subsistence. The abundance and cheapness of provisions are favourable to the advance of population; their scarcity is productive of the opposite effect; 194 but neither cause operates so rapidly as the annual succession of crops. The crop of one year may, perhaps, exceed or fall short of the usual average, by as much as 1/5 or 1/4 but a country, that, like France, has thirty
millions of inhabitants one year, cannot have 36 millions the next; nor could its population be reduced to twenty-
four millions in the space of one year, without the most dreadful degree of suffering. Therefore it is the law of nature, that the population shall one year be superabundantly supplied with subsistence, and another year be subjected to scarcity in some degree or other of intensity.

The only case in which the establishment of an exclusive com-
pany is justifiable, is, when there is no other way of com-
mencing a new trade with distant or barbarous nations. In
that case, the charter is. a kind of patent of invention, and
confers an advantage, commensurate to the extraordinary risk
and expense of the first experiment. The consumers have no
reason to complain of the dearness of products, which, but
for the grant of the charter, they would either not have en-
And so, indeed, it is with all other objects of consumption;
but, as the most of them are not absolutely indispensable to
79Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
existence, the temporary privation of them amounts not to
the absolute extinction of life. The high price of a product,
which has wholly or partially failed at home, is a powerful
stimulus to commerce to import it from a greater distance
and at a greater expense. But it is unsafe to leave wholly to
the providence of individuals the care of supplying an article
of such absolute necessity= the delay of which, but for a few
days, may be a national calamity; the transport of which ex-
ceeds the ordinary means of commerce; and whose weight
and bulk would make its distant transport, especially by land,
double or triple its. average price. If the foreign supply of
corn be relied upon, it may happen to be scarce and dear in
the exporting and importing country at the same moment. The
government of the exporting country may prohibit the ex-
port, or a maritime war may interrupt the transport. But the
article is one the nation cannot do without; or even wait for a
few days longer. Delay is death to a part of the population at
least.

success? I am aware, that, in a few very limited communities,
blessed with a very economical government, like some of the
Swiss cantons, public granaries for storing a casual surplus
have answered the purpose well enough. But I should pro-
nounce them impracticable in large and populous countries.
The advance of capital and its accruing interest would affect
the government in the same manner as private speculators,
and even in a greater degree; for there are few governments,
that can borrow on such low terms as individuals in good
credit. The difficulties of managing a commercial concern,
of buying, storing, and re-selling to so large an extent, would
be still more insuperable. Turgot, in his letters on the com-
merce of grain, has clearly proved, that, in matters of this
kind, a government never can expect to be served at a reason-
able rate; all its agents having an interest in swelling its ex-
penditure, and none of them in curtailing. It would be utterly
impossible to answer for the tolerable conduct of a business
left to the discretion of agents without any adequate control,
whose actions are, for the most part, governed by the supe-
rior dignitaries of the state, who seldom have either the knowl-
edge or condescension requisite for such details. A sudden
panic in the public authorities might prematurely empty the
granaries; a political measure, or a war, divert their contents
to quite a different destination.

For the purpose of equalizing the average consumption to the
average crop, each family ought literally to lay by, in years of
plenty for the deficiency of years of scarcity. But such provi-
dence cannot be reckoned upon in the bulk of the population.
A great majority, to say nothing of their utter want of fore-
sight, are destitute of the means of keeping such a store in
reserve sometimes several years together; neither have they
the accommodations for housing it, or the means of taking it
along with them on a casual change of abode.

Generally speaking, it appears that there is no safe depen-
dence for a reserve of supply against a season of scarcity,
unless the business be confided to the discretionary manage-
ment of mercantile houses of the first capital, credit, and in-
telligence, willing to undertake the purchase, and the filling
and replenishment of the granaries upon certain stipulated
terms, and with the prospect of such advantages, as may fairly
recompense them for all their trouble. The operation would
then be safe and effectual, for the contractors would give se-
curity for due performance; and it would also be cheaper ex-
ecuted in this way than in any other. Different establishments
might be contracted with for the different cities of note; and
these being thus supplied in times of scarcity from the stores
in reserve, would no longer drain the country of the subsis-
tence destined to the agricultural population. 195

Can speculative commerce be depended upon for this reserve
against a deficiency? At first sight it might appear that it could,
that self-interest would be an adequate motive; for the differ-
ence of the price of corn in years of abundance and those of
scarcity is very great. But the recurrence of the oscillation is
too irregular in distance of time, and too infrequent also, to
give rise to a regular traffic, or one that can be repeated at
pleasure. The purchase of the grain, the number and size of
the storehouses, require a very large advance of capital and a
heavy arrear of interest= it is an article that must be repeat-
edly shifted and turned, and is much exposed to fraud and
damage, as well as to popular violence. All these are to be
covered by a profit of rare occurrence. Wherefore, it is pos-
sible, that the article may not hold out sufficient temptation
to the speculator, although this would be the most commend-
able kind of speculation, being framed upon the principle of
buying from the producer when he is eager to sell, and selling
to the consumer when he finds it difficult to purchase.
Public stores and granaries are after all but auxiliary and tem-
porary expedients of supply. The most abundant and advan-
tageous supply will always be that furnished by the utmost
freedom of commerce, whose duties in respect to grain con-
sist chiefly in transporting the produce from the farmyard to
the principal markets, and thence in smaller quantities from
the markets of the districts where it is superabundant to those
of others that may be scantily supplied; or in exporting when
cheap, and importing when dear.

In default of the individual providence of the consumer, and
of speculative accumulation and reserve, neither of which it
would seem can be safely depended upon, can the public au-
thority, as representing the aggregate interest, undertake the
charge of providing against a scarcity with any prospect of
Popular prejudice and ignorance have universally regarded
with an evil eye those concerned in the corn-trade; nor have

mals. The distant prospect of scarcity, or even a slight rise of
price, is insufficient to check this improvidence betimes. If
the great holders shut up their stores, however, the conse-
quent anticipation of a rise of price immediately puts the public
on their guard, and awakens the particular frugality and care
of the little consumers, of whom the great mass of consump-
tion is composed. Ingenuity is set at work to find a substitute
for the scarce article of food, and not a particle is wasted.
Thus, the avarice of one part of mankind operates as a salu-
tary check upon the improvidence of the rest; and, when the
stock withheld at length appears in the market, its quantity
tends to lower the price in favour of the consumer.
the depositories of national authority been always exempt from
similar illiberality. The main charge against them is, that they
buy up corn with the express purpose of raising its price, or at
least of making an unreasonable profit upon the purchase and
re-sale, which is in effect so much gratuitous loss to the pro-
ducer and consumer.

What is meant by this charge? 

If it be meant to accuse the dealers of buying in plentiful seasons, when corn is cheap, and laying by in reserve against seasons of
scarcity, we have just seen that this is a most beneficial op-
eration, and the sole means of accommodating the supply of
so precarious an article to the regularity of an unceasing de-
mand. Large stores of grain laid in at a Low price contribute
powerfully to place the subsistence of the population beyond
risk of failure, and deserve not only the protection, but the
encouragement of the public authorities. But, if it be meant
to charge the corn-dealers with buying up on a rising market
and on the approach of scarcity, and thereby enhancing the
scarcity and the price, although I admit that this operation
has not the same recommendation of utility, and that the con-
sumer is saddled with the additional cost of the operation
without any direct equivalent benefit, for in this instance the
deficiency of one year is not made good by the hoarded sur-
plus of a preceding one; yet I cannot think it has ever been
attended with any very alarming or fatal consequences. Corn
is a commodity of most extended production; and its price
cannot be arbitrarily raised, without disarming the competi-
tion of an infinity of sellers, and without an extent of dealing
and of agency scarcely practicable to individuals. It is, be-
sides, a most cumbersome and inconvenient article in com-
parison with its price, and, consequently, most expensive and
troublesome in the carriage and warehousing. A store of any
considerable value can not escape observation. 196 And its li-
ability to damage or decay often makes sales compulsory,
and exposes the larger speculators to immense loss.
With regard to the tribute which the dealer is supposed to
exact from both producer and consumer, it is a charge that
will attach with equal justice upon every branch of commerce
whatsoever. There would be some meaning in it, could prod-
ucts reach the hands of the consumer without any advance of
capital, without warehouses, trouble, combination, or any kind
of difficulty. But, so long as difficulties shall exist, nobody
will be able to surmount them so cheaply, as those who make
it their special business. Legislation should take an enlarged
view of commerce in the aggregate, small and great; it will
find its agents busied in traversing the whole surface of the
territory, watching every fluctuation of demand and supply,
adjusting the casual or local deficiency of price to meet the
charges of production and excess of price above the capacity
of consumption. Is it to the cultivator, to the consumer, or to
the public administration that we can safely look for so ben-
eficial and powerful an agency? Extend, if you please, the
facility of intercourse, and particularly the capacities of in-
ternal navigation, which alone is suited to the transport of a
commodity so cumbrous and bulky as grain; vigilantly watch
over the personal security of the trader; and then leave him to
follow his own track. Commerce cannot make good the fail-
ure of the crop; but it can distribute whatever there may be to
distribute, in the manner best suited to the wants of the com-
munity, as well as to the interests of production. And doubt-
less it was for this reason that Smith pronounced the labour
of the corn dealer to be favourable to the production of corn,
in the next degree to that of the cultivator himself.
Speculative monopoly is, therefore, extremely difficult, and
little to be dreaded. The kind of engrossment most prejudi-
cial, as well as most difficult of prevention, is that practised
by the domestic prudence of individuals in apprehension of a
scarcity. Some, from excess of precaution, lay by rather more
than they want; while farmers, farming proprietors, millers,
and bakers, who habitually keep a stock on hand, take care
somewhat to swell that stock, in the idea that they shall sell to
a profit whatever surplus there may be; and the infinite num-
ber of these petty acts of engrossment makes them greatly
exceed, in the aggregate, all the united efforts of speculation.
The prevalence of erroneous views of the production and
commerce of articles of human subsistence, has led to a world
of mischievous and contradictory laws, regulations, and or-
dinances, in all countries, suggested by the exigency of the
moment, and often extorted by popular importunity. The dan-
ger and odium thus heaped upon the dealers in grain have
frequently thrown the business into the hands of inferior per-
sons, qualified neither by information nor ability for the busi-
ness; and the usual consequence has followed; namely, that
the same traffic has been carried on in secret, at far greater
expense to the consumers; the dealers to whom it was aban-
But what if it should turn out, after all, that even the selfish
and odious views of such speculators are productive of some
good? When corn is cheap, it is consumed with less provi-
dence and frugality, and used as food for the domestic ani-
81Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
ticle in the country where the scarcity occurs, amounting some-
times to as much as 200 or 300 per cent. If this be not suffi-
cient to tempt the importer, I know of no adequate induce-
ment that the government could hold out to him.
doned being of course obliged to pay themselves for all the
risk and inconvenience of the occupation.

Whenever a maximum of price has been affixed to grain, it
has immediately been withdrawn or concealed. The next step
was to compel the farmers to bring their grain to market, and
prohibit the private sales. These violations of property, with
all their usual accompaniments of inquisitorial search, per-
sonal violence, and injustice, have never afforded any con-
siderable resource to the government employing them. In
polity as well as morality, the grand secret is, not to constrain
the actions, but to awaken the inclinations of mankind. Mar-
kets are not to be supplied by the terror of the bayonet or the sabre. 197

Nations would be less subject to famine, were they to employ a greater variety of aliments. When the whole population de-
pends upon a single product for subsistence, the misery of a scarcity is extreme. A deficiency of corn in France is as bad
as one of rice in Hindostan. When their diet consists of many articles, as butcher’s meat, poultry, esculent roots, vegetables,
fruits, fish, &c., according to local circumstances, the supply
is less precarious; for these articles seldom fail all at a time. 201
Scarcity would also be of less frequent occurrence, if more
attention were paid to the dissemination and perfection of the
art of preserving, at a cheap rate, such kinds of food, as are
offered in superabundance at particular seasons and places;
fish, for instance; their periodical excess might in this way be
made to serve for times of scarcity. A perfect freedom of in-
ternational maritime intercourse would enable the inhabit-
ants of the temperate latitudes to partake cheaply of those
productions, that nature pours forth in such profusion under a
tropical sun. 202 I know not how far it would be possible to
preserve and transport the fruit of the banana; but the experi-
ment has in a great measure succeeded with respect to the
sugarcane, which furnishes, in a thousand shapes, an agree-
able and wholesome article of diet, and is produced so abun-
dantly by all parts of the world, lying within 38º of latitude,
that, but for our present absurd legislative provisions, it might
be had much cheaper than butcher’s meat, and for the same
price as many indigenous fruits and vegetables. 203
When the national government attempts to supply the popu-
lation by becoming itself a dealer, it is sure to fail in satisfy-
ing the national wants itself, and at the same time to extin-
guish all the resources that freedom of commerce would of-
fer; for nobody else will knowingly embark in a losing trade,
though the government may.

During the scarcity prevalent throughout many parts of France,
in the year 1775, the municipalities of Lyons and some other
towns attempted to relieve the wants of the inhabitants, by
buying up corn in the country, and re-selling it at a loss in the
towns. To defray the expense of this operation, they at the
same time obtained an increase of the octroi or tolls upon
goods entering their gates. The scarcity grew worse and worse,
for a very obvious reason; the ordinary dealers naturally aban-
doned markets where goods were sold below the cost price,
and which they could not resort to without paying extra toll
upon entry. 198

To return to the corn-trade, I must protest against the indis-
criminate and universal application of the arguments I have
adduced to show the benefits of liberty. Nothing is more dan-
gerous in practice, than an obstinate, unbending adherence to
system, particularly in its application to the wants and errors
of mankind. The wiser course is, to approximate invariably
to the standard of sound and acknowledged principles, to lead
towards them by the never-failing influence of gradual and
insensible attraction. It is well to fix beforehand a maximum
of price beyond which exportation of grain shall either be
prohibited, or subjected to heavy duties; for, as smuggling
cannot be prevented entirely, it is better that those who are
resolved to practise it should pay the insurance of the risk to
the state than to individuals.

The more necessary an article is, the more dangerous it is to
reduce its price below the natural level. An accidental dear-
ness of corn, though doubtless a most unwelcome occurrence,
is commonly brought about by causes out of all human power
to remove. 199 There is no wisdom in heaping one calamity
upon another, and passing bad laws because there has been a
bad season.

Governments have met with no better success in the matter
of importation, than in the conduct of internal commerce. The
enormous sacrifices made by the commune of Paris and the
general government, to provision the metropolis in the win-
ter of 1816–17 with grain imported from abroad, did not pro-
tect the consumer from an exorbitant advance in the price of
bread, which was besides deficient both in weight and qual-
ity; and the supply was found inadequate after all. 200
We have hitherto regarded the inflated price of grain as the
only evil to be apprehended. But England, in 1815, was
alarmed by a prospect of an opposite evil; viz., that, its price
would be reduced too low by the influx of foreign grain. The
production of this article is, like that of every other, much
On the subject of bounties on import, it is hardly necessary to
touch. The most effectual bounty is the high price of the ar-


more costly in England than in the neighbouring states, owing to a variety of causes, which it is immaterial here to ex-
plain; amongst others, chiefly to the exorbitance of her taxation. Foreign grain could be sold in England at two-thirds of
its cost price to the English grower. 

It, therefore, became a most important question, whether it were better to permit the
free importation, and thus, by exposing the home producer to a ruinous competition with the foreign grower, to render him
incapable of paying his rent and taxes, to divert him from the cultivation of wheat altogether, and place England in a state
of dependence for subsistence upon foreign, perhaps hostile nations; or, by excluding foreign grain from her market, to
give a monopoly to the home producer, at the expense of the consumer, thereby augmenting the difficulty of subsistence
to the labouring classes, and, by the advanced price of the necessaries of life, indirectly raising that of all the manufac-
tured produce of the country, and proportionately disabling it to sustain the competition of other nations.

world; and that an extensive commerce of grain would lead
to the formation of large stores and depots, which will offer
the best possible security against the recurrence of scarcity;
and that, accordingly, as they asserted, there are no countries
less subject to that calamity, or even to violent fluctuations of
price, than those that grow no corn at all; for which they cited
the example. of Holland and other nations similarly circum-
stanced. 205


Even in countries best able to reckon on commercial supply, there are many serious inconveniences to be apprehended from the ruin of internal tillage. 

Subsistence is the primary want of a nation, and it is
neither prudent nor safe to become dependent upon distant
supply. Admitting that laws, which, for the protection of the
agricultural prohibit the import of grain to the prejudice of
the manufacturing interest, are both unjust and impolitic, it
should be recollected that, on the other hand, excessive taxa-
tion, loans, overgrown establishments, civil, military, or dip-
lomatic, are equally impolitic and unjust, and fall more heavily
upon agriculture than upon manufacture. Perhaps one abuse
may make another necessary, to restore the equilibrium of
production, otherwise industry would abandon one branch,
and take exclusively to another, to the evident peril of the
existence of society. 206

This great question has given rise to the most animated contest both of the tongue and the pen; and the obstinate conten-
tion of two parties, each of which had much of justice on its side, leaves the bystanders to infer, that neither has chosen to notice the grand cause of mischief; that is to say, the neces-
sity of supporting the arrogant pretensions of England to uni-
versal influence and dominion, by sacrifices out of all pro-
portion to her territorial extent. At all events, the great acute-
ness and intelligence, displayed by the combatants on either
side, have thrown new light upon the interference of author-
ity in the business of the supply of grain, and have tended to
strengthen the conclusion in favour of commercial liberty.

