---
heading: "Chapter 17b"
title: "Digression on the Balance of Trade"
date: 2015-11-17
image: "/covers/economy.jpg"
description: "Jobbing in merchandise necessarily causes a loss, either to the jobber, if the price be not raised by the transaction, or to the consumer, if it be raised"
icon: "/icons/say.jpg"
---


A determination to maintain a favourable balance of trade, that is to say, to export goods and receive returns of specie,
is, in fact, a determination to have no foreign trade at all; for
the nation, with whom the trade is to be carried on, can only
give in exchange what It has to give. If one party will receive
nothing but the precious metals, the other party may come to
a similar resolution; and, when both parties require the same
commodity, there is no possibility of any exchange. Were it
practicable to monopolize the precious metals, there are few
nations in the world that would not be cut off from all hope of
mutual commercial relations. If one country afford to another
what the latter wants in exchange, what more would she have?
or in what respect would gold be preferable? for what else
can it be wanted, than as the means of subsequently purchas-
ing the objects of desire?

Should any one maintain, that the advantage of producing at
home counterbalances the hardship of paying dearer for al-
most every article; that our own capital and labour are en-
gaged in the production, and the profits pocketed by our own
fellow-citizens; my answer is, that the foreign commodities
we might import are not to be had gratis= that we must pur-
chase them with values of home production, which would
have given equal employment to our industry and capital; for
we must never lose sight of this maxim, that products are
always bought ultimately with products. It is most for our
advantage to employ our productive powers, not in those
branches in which foreigners excel us, but in those which we
excel in ourselves; and with the product to purchase of oth-
ers. The opposite course would be just as absurd, as if a man
should wish to make his own coats and shoes. What would
the world say, if, at the door of every house an import duty
were laid upon coats and shoes, for the laudable purpose of
compelling the inmates to make them for themselves? Would
not people say with justice, Let us follow each his own pur-
suits, and buy what we want with what we produce, or, which
comes to the same thing, with what we get for our products.
The system would be precisely the same, only carried to a
ridiculous extreme.
The day will come, sooner or later, when people will wonder
at the necessity of taking all this trouble to expose the folly of
a system, so childish and absurd, and yet so often enforced at
the point of the bayonet. 160
[End of the digression upon the balance of trade.]
Well may it be a matter of wonder, that every nation should
manifest such anxiety to obtain prohibitory regulations, if it
be true that it can profit nothing by them; and lead one to
suppose the two cases not parallel, because we do not find
individual householders solicitous to obtain the same privi-
lege. But the sole difference is this, that individuals are inde-
pendent and consistent beings, actuated by no contrariety of
To resume our subject. — We have seen, that the very advan-
tages aimed at by the means of a favourable balance of trade,
are altogether illusory; and that, supposing them real, it is
impossible for a nation permanently to enjoy them. It remains
to be shown, what is the actual operation of regulations framed
with this object in view.

will, and more interested in their character of consumers of
coats and shoes to buy them cheap, than as manufacturers to
sell unnaturally dear.

objects of barren consumption, than that of raw materials for home manufacture. Whether the products consumed be of
domestic or of foreign growth, a portion of wealth is destroyed in the act of consumption, and a proportionate inroad made
into the wealth of the community. But that inroad is the result of the act of consumption, not of the act of dealing with the foreigner; and the resulting stimulus to national production, is the same in either case. For, wherewith was the purchase of the foreign product made? either with a domestic product or with money, which must itself have been procured with a domestic product. In buying of a foreigner, the nation really does no more than send abroad a domestic product in lieu of consuming it at home, and consume in its place the foreign product received in exchange. The individual consumer himself, probably, does not conduct this operation; commerce conducts it for him. No one country can buy of another, ex-
cept with its own domestic products.

Who, then, are the classes of the community so importunate for prohibitions or heavy import duties? The producers of
the particular commodity, that applies for protection from competition, not the consumers of that commodity. The pub-
lic interest is their plea, but self-interest is evidently their object. Well, but, say these gentry, are they not the same thing?

are not our gains national gains? By no means= whatever profit is acquired in this manner is so much taken out of the pockets of a neighbour and fellow-citizen and, if the excess of charge thrown upon consumers by the monopoly could be correctly computed, it would be found, that the loss of the consumer exceeds the gain of the monopolist. Here, then, individual and public interest are in direct opposition to each other; and, since public interest is understood by the enlightened few alone, is it at all surprising, that the prohibitive system should find so many partisans and so few opponents?

In defence of import duties it is often urged, “that when the interest of money is lower abroad than at home, the foreign
has an advantage over the home producer, which must be met by a countervailing duty.” The low rate of interest is, to the
foreign producer, an advantage, analogous to that of the superior quality of his land. It tends to cheapen the products he
raises; and it is reasonable enough that our domestic consumers should take the benefit of that cheapness. The same mo-
tive will operate here, that leads us rather to import sugar and
indigo from tropical climates, than to raise them in our own. 

There is in general far too little attention paid to the serious mischief of raising prices upon the consumers. 

The evil is not apparent to cursory observation, because it operates piecemeal, and is felt in a very slight degree on every purchase or
act of consumption= but it is really most serious, on account of its constant recurrence and universal pressure. 

The whole fortune of every consumer is affected by every fluctuation of price in the articles of his consumption; the cheaper they are, the richer he is, and tice versa. If a single article rise in price, he is so much the more poor in respect of that article; if all rise together, he is poorer in respect to the whole. And, since
the whole nation is comprehended in the class of the consumers, the whole nation must in that case be the poorer. Besides
which, it is crippled in the extension of the variety of its enjoyments, and prevented from obtaining products whereof it
stands in need, in exchange for those wherewith it might procure them. It is of no use to assert, that, when prices are raised, what one gains another loses. For the position is not true, except in the case of monopolies; nor even to the full extent with regard to them; for the monopolist never profits to the
full amount of the loss to the consumers. If the rise be occasioned by taxation or import-duty under any shape whatever,
the producer gains nothing by the in crease of price, but just the reverse, as we shall see by and by (Book 3 Chapter 7) so that, in fact, he is no richer in his capacity of producer, though poorer in his quality of consumer. This is one of the
most effective causes of national impoverishment, or at least one of the most powerful checks to the progress of national
wealth.

“But capital is necessary in every branch of production= so that the foreigner, who can procure it at a lower rate of interest, has the same advantage in respect to every product; and, if the free importation be permitted, he will have an advantage over all classes of home producers.” Tell me, then, how his products are to be paid for. “Why, in specie, and there lies the mischief.” 

How is the specie to be got to pay for them? 

“All the nation has, will go in that way; and when it is exhausted national misery will be complete.” So then it is
admitted, that before arriving at this extremity, the constant efflux of specie will gradually render it more scarce at home, and more abundant abroad; wherefore, it will gradually rise 1-3% higher in value at home than abroad; which is
fully sufficient to turn the tide, and make specie flow inwards faster than it flowed outwards. But it will not do so without some returns; and of what can the returns be made, but of
products of the land, or the commerce of the nation? 

There is no possible means of purchasing from foreign nations, otherwise than with the products of the national land and commerce. It is better to buy of them what they can produce cheaper than ourselves, because we may rest assured, that
they must take in payment what we can produce cheaper than they. This they must do, else there must be an end of all inter-change.

This is why it is an absurd distinction to view with more jealousy the import of foreign


in Book II. So that these latter classes participate in the loss
with consumers at large, but get no share of the unnatural
gains of their superiors. Prohibitory measures, besides affect-
ing the pockets of the consumers, often subject them to se-
vere privations. I am ashamed to say, that, within these few
years, we have had the hat-makers of Marseilles petitioning
for the prohibition of the import of foreign straw or chip hats,
on the plea that they injured the sale of their own felt hats; 163
a measure that would have deprived the country people and
labourers in husbandry, who are so much exposed to the sun,
of a light, a cool, and cheap covering, admirably adapted to
their wants, the use of which it was highly desirable to extend
and encourage.

Again, it is affirmed, and what absurd positions have not been
advanced to involve these questions in obscurity? that, since
almost all the nation are at the same time consumers and pro-
ducers, they gain by prohibition and monopoly as much in
the one capacity as they lose in the other; that the producer,
who gets a monopoly-profit upon the object of his own production, is, on the other hand, the sufferer by a similar profit
upon the objects of his consumption; and thus that the nation is made up of rogues and fools, who are a match or each
other. 

Everybody thinks him. self more rogue than fool; for, although all are consumers as well as producers, the enormous profits made upon a single article are much more striking, than reiterated minute losses
upon the numberless items of consumption. If an import duty be laid upon calicoes, the additional annual charge to each
person of moderate fortune, may, perhaps, not exceed 2½ dollars or 3 dollars at most; and probably he does not very
well comprehend the nature of the loss, or feel it much, though repeated in some degree or other upon every thing he con-
sumes; whereas, possibly, this consumer is himself a manufacturer, say a hat-maker; and should a duty be laid upon the
import of foreign hats, he will immediately see that it will raise the price of his own hats, and probably increase his an-
nual profits by several thousand dollars. It is this delusion that makes private interest so warm an advocate for prohibi-
tory measures, even where the whole community loses more by them as consumers, than it gains as producers.
In pursuit of what it mistakes for profound policy, or to gratify feelings it supposes to be laudable, a government will sometimes prohibit or divert the course of a particular trade, and thereby do irreparable mischief to the productive powers of the nation. 

When Philip 2nd became master of Portugal, and forbade all intercourse between his new subjects and the
Dutch, whom he detested, what was the consequence? 

The Dutch, who before resorted to Lisbon for the manufactures of India, of which they took off an immense quantity, finding
this avenue closed against their industry, went straight to India for what they wanted, and, in the end, drove out the Por-
tuguese from that quarter; and, what was meant as the deadly blow of inveterate hatred, turned out the main source of their
aggrandizement. “Commerce,” says Fenelon, “is like the native springs of the rock, which often cease to flow altogether,
if it be attempted to alter their course.” 164 

But, even in this point of view, the exclusive system is pregnant with injustice. It is impossible that every class of production should profit by the exclusive system, supposing it to be universal, which, in point of fact, it never is in practice, though possibly it may be in law or intention. 

Some articles can never, from the nature of things, be derived from abroad;
fresh fish, for instance, or horned cattle; as to them, therefore, import duties would be inoperative in raising the price.

The same may be said of masons and carpenters’ work, and of the numberless callings necessarily carried on within the community; as those of shopmen, clerks, carriers, retail dealers, and many others. The producers of immaterial products, public functionaries, and fundholders, lie under the same disability. These classes can none of them be invested with a monopoly by means of import duties, though they are subjected to the hardship of many monopolies granted in that
way to other classes of producers. 162

Such are the principal evils of impediments thrown in the way of import, which are carried to the extreme point by absolute prohibition. There have, indeed, been instances of nations that have thriven under such a system; but then it was,
because the causes of national prosperity were more powerful than the causes of national impoverishment. Nations resemble the human frame, which contains a vital principle, that incessantly labours to repair the inroads of excess and
dissipation upon its health and constitution. 

Nature is active in closing the wounds and healing the bruises inflicted by our own awkwardness and intemperance. In like manner, states maintain themselves, nay, often increase in prosperity, in spite of the infinite injuries of every description, which friends as well as enemies inflict upon them. And it is worth remarking, that the most industrious nations are those, which are the most subjected to such outrage, because none others could survive them. 

The cry is then “our system must be the true one, for the national prosperity is advancing.” Whereas, were we to
take an enlarged view of the circumstances, that, for the last three centuries, have combined to develop the power and faculties of man; to survey with the eye of intelligence the progress of navigation and discovery, of invention in every Besides, the profits of monopoly are not equitably divided amongst the different classes even of those that concur in the production of the commodity, which is the subject of monopoly. If the master-adventurers, whether in agriculture, manufacture, or commerce, have the consumers at their mercy, their labourers and subordinate productive agents are still more exposed to their extortion, for reasons that will be explained branch of art and science; to take account of the variety of useful animals and vegetables that have been transplanted from one hemisphere to the other, and to give a due attention to the vast augmentation and increased scope both of science and of its practical applications, that we are daily witnesses of, we could not resist the conviction, that our actual prosperity is nothing to what it might have been; that it is engaged in a perpetual struggle against the obstacles and impediments thrown into its way; and that, even in those parts of the world where mankind is deemed the most enlightened, a great part of their time and exertions are occupied in destroying instead of multiplying their resources, in despoiling instead of assisting each other; and all for want of correct knowledge and information respecting their real interests. 165
tion had well-nigh achieved. 

The frontier duties between Holland, Belgium, part of Germany, Italy, and France, were
demolished; and those of the other powers, with the exception of England, were far from oppressive. We may form some
estimate of the benefit thence resulting to commerce, from the discontent and stagnation that have ensued upon the establishment of the present system of lining the frontier of each state with a triple guard of douaniers. All the continental states so guarded have, indeed, preserved their former means of
production; but that production has been made less advantageous.

France has gained prodigiously by the suppression of the provincial barriers and custom-houses,
consequent upon her political revolution. Europe had, in like manner, gained by the partial removal of the international
barriers between its different political states; and the world at large would derive similar benefit from the demolition of
those, which insulate, as it were, the various communities, into which the human race is divided.

But, to return to the subject, we have just been examining, the nature of the injury that a community suffers by difficul-
ties thrown in the way of the introduction of foreign commodities. The mischief occasioned to the country that pro-
duces the prohibited article, is of the same kind and description; it is prevented from turning its capital and industry to
the best account. But it is not to be supposed that the foreign nation can by this means be utterly ruined and stripped of all resource, as Napoleon seemed to imagine, when he excluded the products of Britain from the markets of the continent. To
say nothing of the impossibility of effecting a complete and actual blockade of a whole country, opposed as it must be by
the universal motive of self-interest, the utmost effect of it can only be to drive its production into a different channel. 

A nation is always competent to the purchase and consumption of the whole of its own products, for products are always
bought with other products. Do you think it possible to prevent England from producing value to the amount of a mil-
lion, by preventing her export of woollens to that amount?

You are much mistaken if you do. England will employ the same capital and the same manual labour in the preparation
of ardent spirits, by the distillation of grain or other domestic products, that were before occupied in the manufacture of woollens for the French market, and she will then no longer bring her woollens to be bartered for French brandies. A country, in one way or other, direct or indirect, always consumes the values it produces, and can consume nothing more. If it cannot exchange its products with its neighbours, it is compelled to produce values of such kinds only as it can consume
at home. This is the utmost effect of prohibitions; both parties are worse provided, and neither is at all the richer.

The exclusive system has very serious evils such as smuggling. <!-- ; whereby an action, wholly innocent in itself, is made legally criminal= and persons, who are actually labouring for the general welfare, are subjected to punishment. -->

Smith admits of two circumstances, that, in his opinion, will justify a government in resorting to import-duties= —1. When
a particular branch of industry is necessary to the public security, and the external supply cannot be safely reckoned upon.

On this account a government may very wisely prohibit the import of gun-powder, if such prohibition be necessary to set
the powder-mills at home in activity; for it is better to pay somewhat dear for so essential an article, than to run the risk of being unprovided in the hour of need. 166 2. Where a similar commodity of home produce is already saddled with a
duty. The foreign article, if wholly exempt from duty, would in this case have an actual privilege; so that a duty imposed
has not the effect of destroying, but of restoring the natural equilibrium and relative position of the different branches of production. 

It is impossible to find any reasonable ground for exempting the production of values by the channel of external commerce from the same pressure of taxation that weighs upon the production effected in those of agricul-
ture and manufacture. 

Taxation is an evi and should be reduced to the lowest possible degree. But when once a given amount of taxation is admitted to be necessary, it is but common justice to lay it equally on all 3 branches of industry. The error I wish to expose to reprobation is the notion that taxes of this kind are favourable to Napoleon, doubtless, occasioned much injury, both to England and to the continent, by cramping their mutual relations of commerce as far as he possibly could. But, on the other hand, he did the continent of Europe the involuntary service of facilitating the communication between its different parts, by the universality of dominion, which his ambi-

production. A tax can never be favourable to the public welfare, except by the good use that is made of its proceeds. gland has done in relation to Portugal. In such case, it is mere
exaction and spoliation. 168

These points should never be lost sight of in the framing of
commercial treaties, which are really good for nothing but to
protect industry and capital, diverted into improper channels
by the blunders of legislation. These it would be far wiser to
remedy than to perpetuate. The healthy state of industry and
wealth is the state of absolute liberty, in which each interest
is left to take care of itself. The only useful protection author-
ity can afford them is that against fraud or violence. Taxes
and restrictive measures never can be a benefit= they are at
the best a necessary evil; to suppose them useful to the sub-
jects at large, is to mistake the foundation of national pros-
perity, and to set at naught the principles of political economy. Again, I would observe, that the offer of peculiar advantages by one nation to another, in the way of a treaty of commerce, if not an act of hostility, is at least one of extreme odium in the eyes of other nations. For the concession to one can only
be rendered effectual by refusal to others. 

Hence the germ of discord and of war, with all its mischiefs. It is infinitely more simple, and I hope to have shown, more profitable also, to treat all nations as friends, and impose no higher duties on
the introduction of their products, than what are necessary to
place them on the same footing as those of domestic growth.
Yet, notwithstanding all the mischiefs resulting from the ex-
clusion of foreign products, which I have been depicting, it
would be an act of unquestionable rashness suddenly to change
even so ruinous a policy. 

Disease is not to be eradicated in a moment; it requires nursing and management to dispense even
national benefits. Monopolies are an abuse, but an abuse in
which enormous capital is vested, and numberless industri-
ous agents employed, which deserve to be treated with con-
sideration; for this mass of capital and industry cannot all at
once find a more advantageous channel of national produc-
tion. Perhaps the cure of all the partial distresses that must
follow the downfall of that colossal monster in politics, the
exclusive system, would be as much as the talent of any single
statesman could accomplish; vet when one considers calmly
the wrongs it entails when it is established, and the distresses
consequent upon its overthrow, we are insensibly led to the
reflection, that, if it be so difficult to set shackled industry at
liberty again, with what caution ought we not to receive any
proposition for enslaving her!

Import duties and prohibitions have often been resorted to as a means of retaliation= ‘Your government throws impediments
in the way of the introduction of our national products= are not we, then, justified in equally impeding the introduction
of yours?” This is the favourite plea, and the basis of most commercial treaties; but people mistake their object= grant-
ing that nations have a right to do one another as much mischief as possible, which, by the way, I can hardly admit; I am
not here disputing their rights, but discussing their interests.

Undoubtedly, a nation that excludes you from all commercial intercourse with her, does you an injury; — robs you, as far
as in her lies, of the benefits of external commerce; if, therefore, by the dread of retaliation, you can induce her to abandon her exclusive measures, there is no question about the expediency of such retaliation, as a matter of mere policy.
But it must not be forgotten that retaliation hurts yourself as well as your rival; that it operates, not defensively against her selfish measures, but offensively against yourself; in the first instance, for the purpose of indirectly attacking her. 

The only point in question is this, what degree of vengeance you are animated by, and how much will you consent to throw away
upon its gratification. 167 I will not undertake to enumerate all the evils arising from treaties of commerce, or to apply the
principles enforced throughout this work to all the clauses and provisions usually contained in them. 

Almost every modern treaty of commerce has had for its basis the imaginary advantage and possibility of the liquidation of a favourable balance of trade by an import of specie. 

If these turn out to be chimerical, whatever advantage may have resulted from such treaties must be wholly referred to the additional freedom and facility of international communication obtained by them, and not at all to their restrictive clauses or provisoes, unless either of the contracting parties has availed itself of its superior power, to exact conditions savouring of a tributary character; as En-
But governments have not been content with checking the import of foreign products. In the firm conviction, that national prosperity consists in selling without buying, and blind to the utter impossibility of the thing, they have gone beyond
the mere imposition of a tax or fine upon purchasing of foreigners, and have in many instances offered rewards in the
shape of bounties for selling to them.

This expedient has been employed to an extraordinary degree by the British government, which until recently always
evinced the greatest anxiety to enlarge the market for British commercial and manufactured produce. 169 It is obvious, that
a merchant, who receives a bounty upon export, can, without personal loss, afford to seal his goods in a foreign market at a lower rate than prime cost. In the pithy language of Smith,

“We cannot force foreigners to buy the goods of our own workmen, as we may our own countrymen; the next best ex-
pedient, it has been thought, therefore, is to pay them for buying.”

If a particular commodity, by the time it has reached the French market, costs the English exporter 20 dollars, his
trouble, &c. included, and the same commodity could be bought in France at the same or a less rate, there is nothing to
give him exclusive possession of the market. But if the British government pays a bounty of 2 dollars upon the export,
and thereby enables him to lower his demand from 20 to 18 dollars, he may safely reckon upon a preference. Yet what is
this but a free gift of two dollars from the British government to the French consumer?

The merchant has no objection to this mode of dealing; for his profits
are the same as if the French consumer paid the full value, or
cost price, of the commodity. The British nation is the loser
in this transaction, in the ratio of 10 per cent upon the French
consumption; and France remits in return a value of but 18
for what has cost $20.


Though bounties ate chargeable, and a dead loss to the gross national wealth, there are cases in which it is politic to incur
that loss; 170 as when a particular product is necessary to public security, and must be had at any rate, however extravagant. 

Louis 14th, with a view to restore the marine of France, granted a bounty of 1 dollar per ton upon every ship fitted out
in France. His object was to train up sailors. 

So likewise when the bounty is the mere refunding of a duty previously exacted. 

The bounty paid by Great Britain upon the export of refined sugar is nothing more than the reimbursement of the
import duties upon muscovado and molasses.

When a bounty is paid, not at the moment of export, but at the commencement of productive creation, the home consumer participates with the foreigner in the advantage of the bounty; for, in that case, the article can be sold below cost price in the home as well as in the foreign market. 

If, as is sometimes the case, the producer pockets the bounty, and yet keeps up the price of the commodity, the bounty is then a
present of the government to the producer, over and above the ordinary profits of his industry.

Perhaps, too, it may be wise in a government to grant a premium on a particular product, which, though it make a loss in
the outset, holds out a fair prospect of profit in a few years’
time. 

Smith thinks otherwise= hear what he says on the subject. 

“No regulation of commerce can increase the quantity of industry in any society, beyond what its capital can main-
tain. It can only divert a part of it into a direction, into which
it might not otherwise have gone; and it is by no means certain, that this artificial direction is likely to be more advanta-
geous to the society, than that into which it would have gone of its own accord. The statesman, who should attempt to direct private people in what manner they should employ their capitals, would not only load himself with a most unnecessary attention, but assume an authority, which could safely be trusted, not only to no single person, but to no council or
senate whatever; and which would nowhere be so dangerous, as in the bands of a man who had folly and presumption
enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it. 

Though for want of such regulations, the society should never acquire the proposed manufacture, it would no, upon that account necessarily be the poorer in any one period of its duration. 

In every period of its duration, its whole capital and industry might still have been employed, though upon different objects, in the manner that was most advantageous at the time.” 171 

When, by the means of a bounty, a product is raised either for home or foreign consumption, which would not have been
raised without one, the effect is, an injurious production, one that costs more than it is worth. Suppose an article, when
completely finished off, to be saleable for 5 dollars and no more, but its prime cost, including of course the profits of
productive industry, to amount to 6 dollars, it is quite clear that nobody will volunteer the production, for fear of a loss of 1 dollar. 

But, if the government, with a view to encourage this branch of industry, be willing to defray this loss in other
words, if it offer a bounty of 1 dollar to the producer, the production can then go on, and the public revenue, that is to
say, the nation at large, will be a loser of 1 dollar. 

This is precisely the kind of advantage that a nation gains by encouraging a branch of production which cannot support itself= it is in fact urging the prosecution of a losing concern, the produce of which is exchanged, not for other produce, but for
the bounty given by the state.


Wherever there is any thing to be made by a particular employment of industry, it wants no encouragement; where there is nothing to be made, it deserves none. There is no truth in the argument, that perhaps the state may gain, though individuals cannot; for how can the state gain, except through the medium of individuals? Perhaps it may be said, that the state receives more in duties than it pays in bounties; but suppose it does, it merely receives with one hand and pays with the other: let the duties be lowered to the whole amount of the
bounty, and production will stand precisely where it did before, with this difference in its favour, viz., that the state will
save the whole charge of management of the bounties, and part of that of the duties.


Smith is certainly right, though perhaps there are circumstances that may form exceptions to the general rule, that every one is the best judge how to employ his industry and capital. Smith wrote at a period and in a country, where personal interest is well understood, and where any profitable mode of investing capital and industry is not likely to be long overlooked. But every nation is not so far advanced in intelligence. How many countries are there, where many of the best employments of capital are altogether excluded by prejudices that the government alone can remove!  How many cities and provinces, where certain established investments of capital have prevailed from time immemorial! In one place, every body invests in landed property, in another, in houses, and in others still, in public offices or national funds.

Every unusual application of the power of capital is, in such places, contemplated with distrust or disdain; so that partial-
ity shown to a profitable mode of employing industry or capital may possibly be productive of national advantage.

Moreover, a new channel of industry may ruin an unsupported speculator, though capable of yielding enormous profit, when
the labourers shall have acquired practice, and the novelty has once been overcome. France at present contains the most
beautiful manufactures of silk and of woollen in the world, and is probably indebted for them to the wise encouragement
of Colbert’s administration. 

He advanced to the manufacturers 2000 fr. for every loom at work; and, by the way, this species of encouragement has a very peculiar advantage. In ordinary cases, whatever the government levies upon the product of individual exertion is wholly lost to future production;
but, in this instance, a part was employed in reproduction; a portion of individual revenues was thrown into the aggregate
productive capital of the nation. 

This was a degree of wisdom one could hardly have expected, even from personal self-
interest. 172173


It would be out of place here to inquire, how wide a field bounties open to peculation, partiality, and the whole tribe of
abuses incident to the management of public affairs. 

The most enlightened statesman is often obliged to abandon a scheme of evident public utility, by the unavoidable defects and abuses
in the execution. Among these, one of the most frequent and prominent is, the risk of paying a premium, or granting a favour
to the pretensions, not of merit, but of importunity. 

In other respects, I have no fault to find with the honours, or even pecuniary rewards publicly given to artists or mechanics, in
recompense of some extraordinary achievement of genius or address. 

Rewards of this kind excite emulation, and enlarge the stock of general knowledge, without diverting industry or
capital from their most beneficial channels. 

Besides, they cost nothing in comparison of bounties of another description. 

The bounty on the export of wheat has, by Smith’s account, cost England in some years as much as a million and a half of
dollars. I do not believe that the British or any other government ever spent the fiftieth part of that sum upon agriculture
in any one year.



