---
heading: "Chapter 17c Section 2"
title: "The Effect of Regulations fixing the Manner of Production"
date: 2015-11-17
image: "/covers/economy.jpg"
description: "Jobbing in merchandise necessarily causes a loss, either to the jobber, if the price be not raised by the transaction, or to the consumer, if it be raised"
icon: "/icons/say.jpg"
---



The interference of the public authority, with regard to the details of agricultural production, has generally been of a
beneficial kind. The impossibility of intermeddling in the minute and various details of agriculture, the vast number of
agents it occupies, often widely separated in locality and pursuits, from the largest farming concerns to the little garden of
the cottager, the small value of the produce in comparison with its volume, are so many obstacles that nature has placed
in the way of authoritative restraint and interference. 

All governments, that have pretended to the least regard for the public welfare, have consequently confined themselves to the
granting of premiums and encouragements, and to the diffusion of knowledge which has often contributed largely to the
progress of this art. 

The veterinary college of Alfort, the experimental farm of Ramboullet, the introduction of the Merino breed, are real benefits to the agriculture of France, the enlargement and perfection of which she owes to the providence of the different rulers that her political troubles have successively brought into power.

A national administration that guards with vigilance the fa-
cility of communication and the quiet prosecution of the
labours of husbandry, or punishes acts of culpable negligence,
as the destroying of caterpillars 174 and other noxious insects,
does a service analogous to the preservation of civil order
and of property, without which production must cease altogether.


The regulations relative to the felling of trees in France, however indispensable for the preservation of their growth, at
least in many of their provisions, appear in others rather to operate as a discouragement of that branch of cultivation,
which, though particularly adapted to certain soils and sites, and conducive to the attraction of atmospheric moisture, yet
seems to be daily on the decline. 

But there is no branch of industry that has suffered so much from the officious interference of authority in its details, as
that of manufacture.

Much of that interference has been directed towards limiting
the number of producers, either by confining them to one
trade exclusively, or by exacting specific terms, on which they
shall carry on their business. This system gave rise to the
establishment of chartered companies and incorporated trades.

The effect is always the same, whatever be the means employed. An exclusive privilege, a species of monopoly, is cre-
ated, which the consumer pays for, and of which the privileged persons derive all the benefit. The monopolists can pros-
ecute their plans of self-interest with so much the more ease

such as would never be disposed to take in either their own
countrymen or foreigners? We are told that this system facili-
tates the enforcement of regulations for the warranty and veri-
fication of the quality of products; but are not such regula-
tions illusory in practice, even under the corporate system?
and, supposing them absolutely necessary, is there no more
simple way of enforcing them?

and concert, because they have legal meetings and a regular organization. At such meetings, the prosperity of the corporation is mistaken for that of commerce and of the nation at
large; and the last thing considered is, whether the proposed advantages be the result of actual new production, or merely
a transfer from one pocket to another, from the consumers to the privileged producers. This is the true reason why those
engaged in any particular branch of trade are so anxious to have themselves made the subject of regulation; and the public authorities are commonly, on their part, very ready to indulge them in what offers so fair an opportunity of raising a revenue.

Neither will the length of apprenticeship be a better guaran-
tee of the perfection of the work; the only thing to be de-
pended upon for that perfection is the skill of the workman,
and that is best attained by paying him in proportion to his
superiority. “To teach any young man,” says Smith, “in the
completest manner how to apply the instruments, and how to
construct the machines of the common mechanic trades, can-
not well require the lessons of more than a few weeks, per-
haps those of a few days might be sufficient. The dexterity of
hand, indeed, even in common trades, cannot be acquired
without much practice and experience, but a young man would
practise with much more diligence and attention, if from the
beginning he wrought as a journeyman, being paid in propor-
tion to the little work which he could execute, and paying in
his turn for the materials which he might sometimes spoil
through awkwardness and inexperience.” 176

Moreover, arbitrary regulations are extremely flattering to the
vanity of men in power, as giving them an air of wisdom and
foresight, and confirming their authority, which seems to de-
rive additional importance from the frequency of its exer-
cise. There is, per. haps, at this time, no country in Europe
where a man is free to dispose of his industry and capital in
what manner he pleases; in most places he cannot even change
his occupation or place of residence at pleasure. It is not
enough for a man to have the necessary qualifications of abil-
ity and inclination to become a manufacturer or dealer in the
woollen or silk line, in spirits or calicoes; he must besides
have served his time, or been admitted to the freedom of the
craft. 175 Freedoms and apprenticeships are likewise expedi-
ents of police, not of that wholesome= branch of police, whose
object is the maintenance of public and private security, and
which is neither costly nor vexatious; but of that sort of po-
lice which bad governments employ to preserve or extend
their personal authority at any expense. By the dispensation
of honorary or pecuniary advantages, authority can generally
influence the chiefs and superiors it has appointed to the cor-
porations, who think to earn those honours and emoluments
by their subservience to the power that confers them. These
are the ready tools, for the management of the body at large,
and volunteer to denounce the individuals, whose firmness
may be formidable, and report those whose servility may be
reckoned upon, and all under the pretext of public good. Of-
ficial harangues and public addresses are; never wanting in
plausible reasons for the continuance of old restrictions on
liberty of action, or for the establishment of new ones; for
there is no cause so bad as to be without some argument or
other in its favour.

Were apprentices bound out a year later, and the interval spent
in schools conducted on the plan of mutual instruction, I can
hardly think the products would be worse executed; and, be-
yond all doubt, the labouring class would be advanced a stage
in civilization.

Were apprenticeships a sure means of obtaining a greater
perfection of products, those of Spain would be as good as
those of Britain. It was not before incorporated trades and
compulsory apprenticeships had been abolished in France,
that she attained that superiority of execution she has now to
boast of.

Perhaps there is no one mechanic art nearly so difficult as
that of the gardener or field labourer; yet this is almost the
only one that has nowhere been subjected to apprenticeship.
Are vegetables and fruits produced in less abundance or
perfection?,Were cultivators a corporate body, I suppose it
would soon be asserted, that high-flavoured peaches and
white-heart lettuces could not be raised without a code of
some hundred well penned articles.

The chief advantage, and= the one most relied upon, is, the
insurance of a more perfect execution of the products raised
for consumption, and of a superiority in them highly favourable to the national commerce, and calculated to secure the continued demand of foreigners. But does this advantage result from the system in question? What security is
there that the corporate body itself will always be composed
of men not merely of integrity, but of scrupulous delicacy,
After all, regulations of this nature, even admitting their util-
ity, must be nugatory as soon as evasion is allowed; now it is
notorious that there is no manufacturing towns where money
will not purchase exemption. So that they are more than merely
useless as a warranty of quality; inasmuch as they are the
engine of the mos, odious injustice and extortion.


in the rest of the city, which was subject to those institutions
that are held up as so indispensable? For a very simple reason= because self-interest is the best of all instructors.
In support of these opinions, the advocates for the corporate
sys tem appeal to the example of Great Britain, where industry is well-known to be greatly shackled, and yet manufactures prosper. 

But in this they expose their ignorance of the
real causes of that prosperity.’These causes,” Smith tells us,
“seem to be the general liberty of trade, which, notwithstand-
ing some restraints, is at least equal, perhaps superior, to what
it is in any other country; the liberty of exporting, duty free,
almost all sorts of goods, which are the produce of domestic
industry, to almost any foreign country and, what perhaps is
of still greater importance, the unbounded liberty of trans-
porting them from any one part of our own country to any
other, without being obliged to give any account to any pub-
lic office, without being liable to question or examination of
any kind,” &c. 177 Add to these, the complete inviolability of
all property whatever, either by public or private attack, the
enormous capital accumulated by her industry and frugality,
and lastly, the habitual exercise of attention and judgment, to
which her population is trained from the earliest years; and
there is no need of looking farther for the causes of the manufacturing prosperity of Britain.

An example or two will serve better than all reasoning in the
world, to show the impediments thrown in the way of the
development of industry by incorporations of trades and crafts.
Argand, the inventor of the lamps that go by his name, and
yield, at the same expense, triple the amount of light, was
dragged before the Parlement de Paris, by the company of
tinmen, locksmiths, ironmongers, and journeymen farriers,
who claimed the exclusive right of making lamps. 180 Lenoir,
the celebrated Parisian philosophical and mathematical in-
strument maker, had set up a small furnace for the conve-
nience of working the metals used in his business. The syndics
of the founders’ company came in person to demolish it; and
he was obliged to apply to the king for protection. Thus was
talent dependent upon court favour. The manufacture of ja-
panned hard ware was altogether excluded from France until
the era of the revolution, by the circumstance of its requiring
the skill and implements of many different trades, and the
necessity of being admitted to the freedom of them all, be-
fore an individual could carry it on. It would be easy to fill a
volume with the recapitulation of the disheartening vexations
that personal industry had to encounter in the city of Paris
alone, under the corporate system; and another with that of
the successful efforts made, since that system was abolished
by the revolution.

Those who cite her example in justification of their desire to
enthral the exertions of industry, are not perhaps aware that
the most thriving towns in that kingdom, those on which her
character for manufacturing pre-eminence is mainly built, are
the very places where there are no incorporations of crafts
and trades; Manchester, Birmingham, and Liverpool, 178 were
mere villages a century or two ago, but now rank in point of
wealth and population next to London, and much before York,
Canterbury, and even Bristol, cities of the greatest antiquity
and privileges, and the capitals of her most thriving provinces, but still subjected to the shackles of these Gothic institutions. “The town and parish of Halifax,” says Sir John Nickols, 179 a writer of acknowledged local information, “has,
within these forty years, seen the number of its inhabitants
quadrupled= whilst many other towns, subjected to corporations, have experienced a sensible diminution of theirs. 

Houses
situated within the precincts of the city of London hardly find
tenants, and numbers of them remain empty; whilst Westminster, Southwark, and the other suburbs are continually increasing. These suburbs are free, whilst London sup-
ports within itself four-score and twelve exclusive companies of all kinds, of which we may see the members annually
adorn, with a silly pageantry, the tumultuous triumphal procession of the Lord Mayor.”

For the same reason that the free suburb of a chartered town,
or a free town in the midst of a country embarrassed by the
officiousness of a meddling government, will exhibit an un-
usual degree of prosperity, a nation that enjoys the freedom
of industry, in the midst of others following the corporate
system, would probably reap similar advantages. Those have
thriven the most, that have been the least shackled by the
observance of formalities, provided, of course, that individu-
als be secured from the exactions of power, the chicanery of
law, and the attempts of dishonesty or violence. Sully, whose
whole life was spent in the study and practice of measures for
improving the prosperity of France, entertained this opinion. 181
In his memoirs, he notices the multiplicity of useless laws
and ordinances, as a direct barrier to the national progress. 182
It may, perhaps, be alleged, that, were all occupations quite
free, a large proportion of those who engaged in them would
fall a sacrifice to the eagerness of competition. Possibly they
might, in some few instances, although it is not very likely
there should be a great excess of candidates in a line, that
held out but little prospect of gain; yet, admitting the casual
occurrence of this evil, it would be of infinitely less magni-
tude, than permanently keeping up the prices of produce at a
The prodigious manufacturing activity of some of the sub-
urbs of Paris is notorious; of the Faubourg St. Antoine, in
particular, where industry enjoyed many exemptions. Some
products were made nowhere else. How happened it, that
without apprenticeships, or the necessity of being free of the
craft, the manufacturer acquired a greater degree of skill, than
75Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
spondence with the sample of conditions, express or implied,
must be rigidly enforced, and government should meddle with
production no further. I would wish to impress upon my read-
ers, that the mere interference is itself an evil, even where it
is of use= 184 first, because it harasses and distresses individu-
als; and, secondly, because it costs money, either to the na-
tion, if it be defrayed by government, that is to say, charged
upon the public purse, or to the consumer, if it be charged
upon the specific article; in the latter case, the charge must of
course enhance the price, thereby laying an additional tax
upon the home consumer, and pro tanto discouraging the foreign demand.

rate that must limit its consumption, and abridge the power
of purchasing in the great body of. consumers.
If the measures of authority, levelled against the free disposi-
tion of each man’s respective talents and capital, are criminal
in the eye of sound policy, it is still more difficult to justify
them upon the principles of natural right. “The patrimony of
a poor man,” says the author of the Wealth of Nations, “lies in
the strength and dexterity of his hands= and to hinder him
from employing this strength and dexterity in what manner
he thinks proper, without injury tc his neighbour, is a plain
violation of his most sacred property.”

If interference be an evil, a paternal government will be most
sparing of its exercise. It will not trouble itself about the cer-
tification of such commodities, as the purchaser must under-
stand better than itself; or of such as cannot well be certified
by its agents; for, unfortunately, a government must always
reckon upon the negligence, incapacity, and misconduct of
its retainers. But some articles may well admit of certifica-
tion; as gold and silver, the standard of which can only be
ascertained by a complex operation of chemistry, which few
purchasers know how to execute, and which, if they did, would
cost them infinitely more than it can be executed for by the
government in their stead.

However, as society is possessed of a natural right to regulate
the exercise of any class of industry, that without regulation
might prejudice the rest of the community, physicians, sur-
geons, and apothecaries, are with perfect justice subjected to
an examination into their professional ability. The lives of
their fellow-citizens are dependent upon their skill, and a test
of that skill may fairly be established; but. it does not seem
advisable to limit the number of practitioners nor the plan of
their education. Society has no interest further than to ascer-
tain their qualification.

On the same grounds, regulation is useful and proper, when
aimed at the prevention of fraud or contrivance, manifestly
injurious to other kinds of production, or to the public safety,
and not at prescribing the nature of the products and the meth-
ods of fabrication. Thus, a manufacturer must not be allowed
to advertise his goods to the public as of better than their
actual quality= the home consumer is entitled to the public
protection against such a breach of faith; and so, indeed, is
the mercantile character of the nation, which must suffer in
the estimation and demand of foreign customers from such
practices. And this is an exception to the general rule, that the
best of all guarantees is the personal interest of the manufac-
turer. For, possibly, when about to give up business, he may
find it answer to increase his profit by a breach of faith, and
sacrifice a future object he is about to relinquish for a present
benefit. A fraud of this kind ruined the French cloths in the
Levant market, about the year 1783; since when the German
and British have entirely supplanted them. 183 We may go still
further. An article often derives a value from the name, or
from the place of its manufacture. When we judge from long
experience, that cloths of such a denomination, and made at
such a place, will be of a certain breadth and substance, it is a
fraud to fabricate, under the same name and at the same place,
a commodity of inferior substance and quality to the ordinary
standard, and thus to send it into the world under a false certificate.

In Great Britain, the individual inventor of a new product or
of a new process may obtain the exclusive right to it, by ob-
taining what is called a patent. While the patent remains in
force, the absence of competitors enables him to raise his
price far above the ordinary return of his outlay with interest,
and the wages of his own industry. Thus he receives a pre-
mium from the government, charged upon the consumers of
the new article; and this premium is often very large, as may
be supposed in a country so immediately productive as Great
Britain, where there are consequently abundance of affluent
individuals, ever on the look-out for some new object of en-
joyment. Some years ago a man invented a spiral or worm
spring for insertion between the leather braces of carriages,
to ease their motion, and made his fortune by the patent for
so trifling an invention.

Privileges of this kind no one can reasonably object to; for
they neither interfere with, nor cramp any branch of industry,
previously in operation. Moreover, the expense incurred is
purely voluntary; and those who choose to incur it, are not
obliged to renounce the satisfaction of any previous wants,
either of necessity or of amusement.

However, as it is the duty of every government to aim at the
constant amelioration of its subjects’ condition, it cannot de-
prive other producers to eternity of the right to employ part
of their industry and capital in this particular channel, which
Hence we may form an opinion of the extent to which gov-
ernment may carry its interference with benefit. The corre-

times fixed by the government itself, which thus assigns a
limit to the partiality it exercises towards the producers, and
the injustice it practises upon the consumers= otherwise, the
avarice of the privileged company would be bounded only by
the dread of losing more by the reduction of the. gross amount
of its sales, in consequence of increased prices, than it would
gain by their unnatural elevation. At all events, the consumer
pays for the commodity more than its worth; and government
generally contrives to share in the profits of the monopoly.
perhaps they might sooner or later have themselves discov-
ered, or preclude the consumer for a very long period from
the advantages of a competition price. Foreign nations being
out of its jurisdiction, would of course grant no privilege to
the inventor, and would, therefore, in this particular, during
the operation of the patent, be better off than the nation where
the invention originated.

France 185 has imitated the wise example of England, in as-
signing a limit to the duration of these patent rights, after
which the invention is free for all the world to avail them-
selves of. It is also provided, that, if the process be capable of
concealment, it shall be divulged at the expiration of the term.
And the patentee, who in this case, it may be supposed, could
do without the patent, has this advantage= that if his secret be
discovered by any body in the interim, it cannot be made
available till the expiration of the term.

It has been said, for the most ruinous expedient is sure to find
some plausible argument or other to support it, that the com-
merce with certain nations requires precautionary measures,
which privileged companies only can enforce. At one time
the plea is, that forts must be built, and marine establishments
kept up; as if in truth it were worth while to traffic sword in
hand, or an army were necessary to protect plain dealing; or
as if the state did not already maintain at great charge a mili-
tary force for the protection of its subjects! At another, that
diplomatic address is indispensable. The Chinese, for instance,
are a people so bigoted to form and prone to suspicion — so
entirely independent of other nations, by reason of their re-
mote position, the extent of their territory, and the peculiar
character of their wants, that is a matter of special and pre-
carious favour to be allowed to deal with them. We must,
therefore, elect either to go without their teas, silks, and
nankeens, or be content to submit tc precautions, which can
alone insure the continuance of the trade; for the dealings of
individuals might endanger the continuance of that good
humour, without which the mutual intercourse of the two na-
tions would be at an end.

Nor is it at all necessary that the government should inquire
into the novelty or utility of the invention; for, if it be useless,
so much the worse for the inventor, and, if it be already known,
every body is competent to plead and prove that fact, and the
previous right of the public; so that the only sufferer is the
inventor, who has been at the expense of a patent for nothing.
Thus the public is no loser by this species of encouragement,
but, on the contrary, may derive prodigious advantage.

The regulations tending to direct either the object or the method of production, which have been above observed upon,
by no means comprise all the measures adopted by different nations with those views. Indeed, were I to specify them all,
my catalogue would soon be incomplete; for new ones are every day brought into practice. 

The great point is, to lay down certain principles, that may enable us beforehand to
judge of their consequences. 

But there are two other branches of commerce, that have been the subject of more than usual
regulation, and are, therefore, worthy of more special inves-
tigation. I shall devote the two succeeding sections to their
exclusive examination.

But, let me ask, is it so certain that the agents of a company,
who are too apt to presume upon the support of the military
power, either of the nation or at least of the company,-is it
quite certain, that such agents are more likely to keep alive an
amicable feeling than private traders, in whom more deference to local institutions might be expected, and who would
have an immediate interest in keeping clear of any misunderstanding that should endanger both their persons and their
property? 186

But, supposing the worst that could happen, and granting, for
argument’s sake, that the trade with China can not be conducted otherwise than by a privileged company, does it follow, that with out one we must needs give up the taste for Chinese productions? Certainly not. 

The trade in Chinese goods will always exist, for this plain reason, that it suits both
parties, the Chinese and their customers. But shall we not~pay
dearer for those goods? There is no ground for thinking so.

Three-fourths of the European states have never sent a single ship to China, and yet are abundantly supplied with teas, with
silks, and with nankeens, and that too at a very cheap rate.
