+++
title= "The Revenue of Capital"
date= 2015-09-30
image= "/covers/economy.jpg"
description= "The capital used in productiion establishes a demand for capital to be so employed. It enables its owners to charge for that service"
linkb= "/research/say/treatise"
linkbtext= "Index"
linkf= "/research/say/treatise"
linkftext= "Index"
heading= "Chapter 8"
+++

The capital used in productiion establishes a demand for capital to be so employed. It enables its owners to charge for that service.

"The profit of capital" earned by capitalist is distinct from the profit of the industry employing it. 
- If he employs his capital himself, it becomes the revenue of his capital, which is added to that of his personal talent and industry, and often confounded with it.
- If he lends it, the revenue of capital is the interest paid for its use, the proprietor abandoning to the borrower the profit derivable from his personal employment of the capital lent.

The increasing prosperity of manufacture and commerce has raised them in the scale of estimation. The object of war is
changed, from the spoliation and destruction of the sources of wealth, to their quiet and exclusive possession. 

For the last two centuries, where war has not been made to gratify the childish vanity of a nation or a monarch, the bone of contention has always been, either colonial sovereignty, or commercial monopoly. Instead of a contest. of hungry barbarians against their wealthy and industrious neighbours, it has been one between civilized nations on either side; wherein the victor has shown the greatest anxiety to preserve the resources of the conquered territory. The invasion of Greece by the Turks, in the fifteenth century, appears to have been the final effort of pure barbarism arrayed against civilization. 

The As the investigation of the interest of capital lent will help to throw light on the subject of the profit derivable from its personal employment, it may be as well, in the first instance, to acquire a just idea of the nature and variation of interest.


## Section 1= Loans at Interest.
<!-- doubtedly one cause, although, indeed, it was one amongst
many. -->

The interest of capital lent is improperly called the interest of money. It was formerly called usury, as rent for its use and enjoyment. 

Rent is the correct term for interest is nothing more than the price, or rent, paid for the enjoyment of an object of value. But the word has acquired an odious meaning, and now presents to the mind the idea of illegal, exorbitant interest only, a milder but less expressive term having been substituted by common usage.

The progressive advance of industry has taught us to view the loan of capital in a different light. In ordinary cases, it is no longer a resource in the hour of emergency, but an agent, an instrument, which may be turned to the great benefit, as well of society, as of the individual. 

Henceforward, it will be reckoned no more avaricious or immoral to take interest, than to receive rent for land, or wages for labour; it is an equitable compensation adjusted by mutual convenience; and the con-
tract, fixing the terms between borrower and lender, is of precisely the same nature, as any other contract whatsoever. 

Before the functions and utility of capital were known, it is probable, that the demand of rent for it by lenders was considered an abuse and oppression, — an expedient to favour the rich and prejudice the poor; nay, further, that frugality, the sole means of amassing capital, was regarded as parsimony, and deemed a public mischief by the populace, in whose eyes, the sums not spent by great proprietors were looked on as lost to themselves. They could not comprehend, that money, laid by to be turned to account in some beneficial employment, must be equally spent; for, if it were buried. it could never be turned to account at all; that it is, in fact, spent in a manner a thousand times more profitable to the poor; 56 and that a labouring man is never sure of earning a subsis-
tence, except where there is a capital in reserve for him to
work upon. This prejudice against rich individuals, who do
not spend their whole income, still exists pretty generally;
formerly it was universal; lenders themselves were not alto-
gether free from it, but were so much ashamed of the part
they were acting, as to employ the most disreputable agents
in the collection of profits perfectly just, and highly advanta-
geous to society.

In ordinary cases of exchange, the transaction is ended as soon as the exchange is completed. Whereas, in a loan, there remains to be calculated the risk the lender incurs of never recovering the whole, or at least a part of his capital. 

The risk is practically estimated, and indemnified by some addition of interest, in the nature of a premium of insurance. 

Whenever there happens to be a question about the interest of advances, a careful distinction should be made between these, its two component parts; otherwise, there is always danger of error; and individuals, or even the agents of public authority, will be apt to involve themselves in useless and disastrous operations.

Thus, the practice of usury has been uniformly revived, whenever it has been attempted to limit the rate of interest, or abolish it altogether. 

The severer the penalties, and the more rigid their exaction, the higher the interest of money was sure to
rise; and this is what might naturally have been expected; for
the greater the risk, the greater premium of insurance did it
require to tempt the lender. At Rome, while the republican
form of government lasted, the interest of money was enor-
mous, as it was natural to suppose, even if it were not a mat-
ter of history. The debtors, who are always the plebeians, were
continually threatening their patrician creditors. The laws of
Mahomet have prohibited loans at interest; and what is the
consequence in the Mussulman dominions? Money is lent at
interest, but the lender must be indeminified for the use of his
capital, and, moreover, for the risk incurred in the contraven-
tion of the law. It was the same in Christian countries, so long
as loans at interest were illegal= and where the necessity of
borrowing enforced the toleration of the practice amongst the
Jews, such were the humiliation, oppression, and extortion,
to which, on one pretext or another, that nation was exposed
on this score, that nothing short of a very heavy rate of inter-
est could indemnify for such repeated loss and mortification.
Letters patent of the French king John, bearing date in the
year 1360, are now extant, which authorises the Jews to lend
on pledges at the rate of four deniers per week for every livre
of twenty sous, which is more than eighty-six per cent per
It is, therefore, not surprising that the ecclesiastical, and at
several periods, the civil codes, likewise, should have inter-
dicted loans at interest; and that, during the whole of the
middle ages, throughout the larger states of Europe, this traf-
fic should have been reputed infamous, and abandoned to the
Jews. — The little manufacturing or commercial industry of
those days was kept alive by the scanty capital of the dealers
and mechanics themselves= and agricultural industry, which
was pursued with somewhat better success, was supported
by the advances of the lords and great proprietors, who em-
ployed their serfs or retainers on their own account. Loans
were contracted for, not with a view of profitably employing
the money, but merely to satisfy some urgent want, so that the
exactor of interest was profiting by a neighbour’s distress;
and it may easily be conceived, that a religion, founded on
the principle of fraternal love, as the Christian religion is,
must disapprove a calculating spirit, that even now is a stranger
to generous bosoms, and repugnant to the common maxims
of morality. — Montesquieu 57 attributes the decline of com-
merce to this proscription of loans at interest; which was un-
183Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
annum; but in the year following,, the same monarch, though
recorded as one of the most scrupulous performers of his royal
word that our annals can boast of, caused the quantity of pure
metal contained in the coin to be reduced; so that the lenders
no longer received back a value equal to what they had lent.
barous habits then prevalent among the nations with whom
they traded; for different nations were then much greater
strangers to each other, than they are at present, and commer-
cial laws and customs much less respected; and in part to the
imperfections of the art of navigation. There was more dan-
ger in a voyage from the Pireaus to Trapezus, though but three
hundred leagues distant, than there is now in one from L’Orient
to China, which is a distance of seven thousand. Thus, the
improvements of geography and navigation have contributed
to lower the rate of interest, and ultimately to reduce the cost
price of products. Loans are sometimes contracted not for a
productive investment, but for mere barren consumption.
Transactions of this kind should always awaken the suspi-
cion of the lender, inasmuch as they engender no means of
repayment of either principal or interest. If charged upon a
growing revenue, they are, at all events, an anticipation of
that revenue; and if charged upon any of the sources of rev-
enue, they afford the means of dissipating the particular source
itself. If there be the security neither of revenue nor of its
source, they barely place the property of one person at the
wanton disposition of another.

This explanation will alone suffice to justify the very heavy interest demanded, without at all taking into calculation, that at a period, when loans were negotiated, not to forward in-
dustrious enterprises, but to support war, to feed extravagance,
and to further the most hazardous projects; at a period when
laws were powerless, and lenders unable legally to enforce
their claims against their debtors, it required a very ample
premium to cover the risk of non-payment. 

In fact, the premium of insurance absorbed the far greater part of what passed under the name of interest, or usury= and the actual bonafide interest, the rent for the use of capital lent, was reduced to a
very trifle; for, though capital was scarce, there is reason to
suppose. that productive employment was still more so. Of
the 86 per cent interest paid in the reign of king John, per-
haps not more than 3 or 4% was the equivalent for the productive service of the capital advanced; for all productive
labour is better paid now, than it was in those days; and even
now-a-days the rent of capital can scarcely be reckoned higher
than 5 per cent; the excess is so much premium of insurance
for the lender’s indemnity.

Among the circumstances incident to the nature of the em-
ployment, which influence the rate of interest, the duration of
the loan must not be forgotten; ceteris paribus, interest is
lower when the lender can withdraw his funds at pleasure, or
at least in a very short period; and that both on account of the
positive advantage of having capital readily at command, and
because there is less dread of a risk, which may probably be
avoided by timely retreat. The facility of immediate negotia-
tion presented by the transferable bills and notes of modern
governments, is one principal cause of the low rate of inter-
est, at which many of these governments are enabled to bor-
row. 59 This interest, in my opinion, hardly covers the risk of
the lender; but he always reckons on the certainty of selling
his securities before the moment of catastrophe, should any
serious alarm be entertained. The public securities that are
not negotiable, bear a much higher interest; such, for instance,
as the old personal annuities in France, which the govern-
ment generally sold at the rate of 10 per cent a high average
for young lives. Wherefore the Genevese acted with excel-
lent judgment, in settling their annuities on thirty lives of well-
known public characters. By this means, they made their an-
nuities negotiable, and so contrived to get the rate of interest
of securities not negotiable, upon securities that were nego-
tiable.

Thus, the ratio of the premium of insurance, which frequently
forms the greater portion of what is called interest, depends
on the degree of security presented to the lender; which secu-
rity consists chiefly in three circumstances= — 1. The safety
of the mode of employment; 2. The personal ability and
character of the borrower, 3. The good government of the
country he happens to reside in. We have just seen, how much
the hazardous purposes, to which loans were applied in the
middle ages, enhanced the premium of insurance necessarily
paid to the lender.

It is the same with all perilous investments of capital, with a
difference in degree only. The Athenians of old, made a dis-
tinction between marine interest, or interest of capital afloat,
and land-interest, or interest on shore; the former was rated
at 30 per cent more or less per voyage, whether to the Euxine,
or to any port in the Mediterranean.[] 58 As two such voyages
were accomplished with ease in the year, the annual marine
interest may be rated at about 60, while other interest was
commonly not more than 12 per cent. Supposing that, of the
12 per cent one half was assigned to cover the risk of the
lender; we shall find, that the mere annual rent or hire of money
at Athens, was 6 per cent only, which I should still think above
the mark; yet, supposing it to have been so high, the marine
interest allowed 54 per cent for insurance of the lender’s risk.
So enormous a premium must be attributed in part to the bar-
About the vast influence of personal character and ability in
the borrower, in determining the amount of the premium of
insurance to the lender, there can be no doubt whatever= they
are the basis of what is called personal credit; and it is hardly
necessary to say, that a person in good credit borrows at a
cheaper rate, than another who has none.

Next to approved integrity and probity, what most contrib-
utes to the credit of an individual or of a government, is past
punctuality in performance of engagements; this is, in fact,
the very corner-stone of credit, and one that seldom proves
insecure. But why, it may be asked, may not a man who has
never yet made default in his payment, fail the very next
moment? There is very little probability that he will, espe-
cially if his punctuality be of long standing. For, to have been
ever punctual in his payments, he must either have always
been possessed of value in hand sufficient to meet demands
upon him; that is to say, he must have been a man of property
over and above his debts, which is the best possible ground
of trust; or else he must have managed matters so well, and
have speculated with so much judgment and safety, as always
to have had his returns arrive before the calls became due;
thus evincing a degree of ability and prudence, which afforded
an excellent guarantee for his future punctuality. The con-
verse of this is the reason, why a merchant, that has once
failed or hesitated in the performance of his engagements,
thenceforward loses his credit entirely.
enforces the payment of debts, they must always be ineffec-
tive, if law be partially or capriciously administered. The
moment a debtor is, or hopes to be, out of his creditor’s reach,
there is a risk to be run by the creditor, which is of value, and
must be indemnified.

After having thus detached from the rate of bare interest all
that is paid as premium of insurance to the lender against the
risk of total or partial loss of his capital, it remains to con-
sider that part, which is purely and simply interest; that is to
say, rent paid for the utility and the use of capital.
Now this portion of the gross sum called interest is larger in
proportion as the supply of capital available for loans is less;
and as the demand of capital for that specific object is greater;
and again, that. demand is the greater in proportion to the
more numerous and more lucrative employments of capital.
Consequently, a rise in the rate of interest does not infallibly
or universally denote, that capital is growing scarcer; for pos-
sibly, it may be a sign, that its uses are multiplied. Smith has
remarked this consequence upon the close of the very suc-
cessful war on the part of England, which terminated with the
peace of 1763. 63 The rate of interest then advanced instead of
declining; the important acquisitions of England had opened
a new field for her commercial enterprise and speculation;
capital was not diminished in quantity, but the demand for it
was increased; and the rise of interest, which ensued, though
in most cases a sign of impoverishment, was, in this, a conse-
quence of the acquisition of new sources of wealth.
Finally, the good government of the country, where the debtor
resides, reduces the risk of the creditor, and consequently,
the premium of insurance he is obliged to demand to cover
that risk. Hence it is, that the rate of interest rises, whenever
the laws and their administration do not insure the perfor-
mance of engagements. It is yet more aggravated, when they
excite to the violation of them; as when they authorise non-
payment, or do not acknowledge the validity of bona fide
contracts.

France, in 1812, experienced the opposite effect of a cause
directly the reverse. A long and destructive war, which had
annihilated almost all external communication; exorbitant
taxation; the ruinous system of licenses; the commercial en-
terprises of the government itself; frequent and arbitrary al-
terations in the duties on import; confiscation, destruction,
vexation; in fine, a system of administration uniformly avari-
cious and hostile to private interest, had rendered all enter-
prises of industry difficult, hazardous and ruinous in the ex-
treme. The aggregate capital of the nation was probably on
the decline; but the beneficial employment of it became still
more rare as well as dangerous; so much so, that interest never
fell so low in France as at that period; and, what is in general
the sign of extreme prosperity, was then the effect of extreme distress.

The resort to personal restraint against insolvent debtors has
been generally considered as injurious to the borrower; but
is, on the contrary, much in his favour. Loans are made more
willingly, and on better terms, where the rights of the lender
are best secured by law. 60 Besides, the encouragement to ac-
cumulate capital is thereby enlarged; whenever individuals
mistrust the mode of investing their savings, there is a strong
inducement to every one to consume the whole of his income,
and this consideration will, perhaps, help to explain a curious
moral phenomenon; namely, that irresistible avidity for ex-
cessive enjoyment, which is a common symptom in times of
political turbulence and confusion. 61

However, while on the subject of the necessity of personal
severity towards debtors, I cannot recommend the practice of
imprisonment; to confine a debtor is to command him to dis-
charge his debts, and at the same time deprive him of the
means of so doing. There seems more reason in the Hindu
institution, giving the creditor the option of seizing the per-
son of his insolvent debtor, and confining him at the creditor’s
own home to compulsory labour, for the creditor’s benefit. 62
But, whatever be the means, whereby the public authority
These exceptions serve but to confirm the general and eter-
nal law, that the more abundant is the disposable capital, in
proportion to the multiplicity of its employments, the lower
will the interest of borrowed capital fall. With regard to the
supply of disposable capital, that must depend on the quan-
tum of previous savings. On this head, I must refer to what I
185Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
have before said upon the subject of the formation of capi-
tal. 64 well of interest on capital, as likewise of profit accruing from
capita, employed, which we are about to consider presently.
If it be desired, that capital in search of employment, and
industry in search of capital, should both be satisfied in the
fullest manner, entire liberty of dealing must be allowed in
all matters touching loans at interest. Disposable capital, be-
ing thus left to itself, will seldom remain long unemployed;
and there is every reason to believe, that as much industry
will be called into activity, as the actual state of society will
admit. It has been sometimes supposed, that capital is multiplied by
the operation of credit. This error, though frequently recur-
ring ir works professing to treat of political economy, can
only arise from a total ignorance of the nature and function of
capital. Capital consists of positive value vested in material
substance, and not of immaterial products, which are utterly
incapable of being accumulated. And a material product evi-
dently cannot be in more places than one, or be employed by
more persons than one, at the same identical moment. The
works, machinery, utensils, provisions, and stock in hand,
composing the capital of a manufacturer, may possibly be
wholly borrowed; in which case, he will be acting upon a
hired capital, and not on one of his own; yet, beyond all ques-
tion that capital can be made use of by no one else, so long as
it remains within his control and management= the lender has
parted with the power of otherwise disposing of it for the
time. A hundred others might have equal security and credit
to offer; but their applications could not multiply the volume
of disposable capital, and could have no other effect than to
prevent other capital from remaining idle and out of employ. 65
But it is essential to pay a strict attention to the meaning of
the term, supply of disposable capital; for this alone can have
any influence upon the rate of interest; it is only so much
capital, as the owners have both the power and the will to
dispose of, that can be said to be in circulation. A capital
already vested and engaged in production or otherwise, is no
longer in the market, and therefore no longer forms a part of
the total circulating capital; its owner is no longer a competi-
tor of other owners in the business of lending, unless the
employment be one, from which capital may be easily disen-
gaged and transferred to other objects. Thus, capital lent to a
trader, and liable to be withdrawn from his hands at a short
notice, and, a fortiori, capital employed in the discount of
bills of exchange, which is one way of lending among com-
mercial men, is capital, readily disposable and transferable
to any other channel of employment, which the owner may
judge convenient.

It is not to be expected, that I should here enter upon a com-
putation of the motives of affection, consanguinity, generos-
ity, or gratitude, which may occasionally give rise to the loan
of capital, or influence the amount of interest demanded for
it. Every reader must take upon himself to appreciate the in-
fluence of moral causes upon the laws of political economy,
which alone we profess to expound.

Capital employed by the owner on his own account, in a trade
that may be soon wound up, in that of a grocer for instance,
stands nearly in the same predicament. The articles he deals
in find at all times a ready market, and the capital thus em-
ployed may be realized, repaid if lent, re-lent and re-employed
in other trades, or applied to any other use. It is always either
in actual circulation, or at least on the point of being so. Of
all values, the one most immediately disposable is that of
money. But capital embarked in the construction of a mill, or
other fabric, or even in a movable of small dimensions, is
fixed capital, which being no longer available for any other
purpose, is withdrawn from the mass of circulating capital,
and can no longer yield any other benefit than that of the
product wherein it has been vested. Nor should it be lost sight
of, that even though the mill or other fabric be sold, its value,
as capital, is not by that means restored to circulation; it has
merely passed from one proprietor to another. On the other
hand, the disposable value, wherewith the buyer has made
the purchase, is not thrown out of circulation, having merely
passed from his into the seller’s hands. The sale neither in-
creases nor diminishes the mass of floating capital ir the mar-
ket. Attention to this circumstance is essential to the forming
a correct estimate of the causes, that determine the rate, as
To limit capitalists to the tending at a certain fixed rate only,
is to set an arbitrary value on their commodity, to impose a
maximum of price upon it, and to exclude, from the mass of
floating or circulating capital, all that portion, whose propri-
etors cannot, or will not, accept of the limited rate of interest.
Laws of this description are so mischievous, that it is well
they are so little regarded as they almost always are, the wants
of borrowers combining with those of lenders, for the pur-
pose of evading them; which is easily managed, by stipulat-
ing for benefits to the lender, not indeed bearing the name of
interest, although really the same thing in the end. The only
consequence of such enactments is, to raise the rate of inter-
est, by adding to the risks, to which the lender is exposed,
and against which he must be indemnified. It is somewhat
amusing to find that those governments, which have fixed the
rate of interest, have almost invariably themselves set the
example of breaking their own laws, by borrowing at higher
than legal interest in their own case.

That interest should be fixed by law is highly proper and necessary; but it should be fixed only in cases, where there is no previous agreement about it; as in the case of a legal recovery
of a sum with interest. And, in such case, I think the interest
fixed by law should be estimated at the lowest rate that is
usually paid by individuals; because the lowest rate is that
paid by the safest investments. Now, it is quite consistent with
justice, that the withholder of capital should restore it even
with interest; but that is in the supposition, that it has remained
all the while in his possession; which it cannot be supposed
to have done, without his having invested it in the way the
least hazardous, and consequently without his having drawn
from it at least the lowest interest it would have afforded.
depend upon the quality of the object lent or borrowed Noth-
ing is more common in trade, than to lend and borrow other
objects than money. When a manufacturer buys the raw ma-
terial of his business at a certain credit, he, in fact, borrows
the wool, or cotton, as the case may be, making use of the
value of those materials in his concern; and their quality has
no influence on the interest, with which he credits the seller. 66
The glut or scarcity of the commodity lent only affects its
relative price to other commodities, and has no influence
whatever on the rate of interest upon its advance or loan. Thus,
when silver money lost three-fourths of its former relative
value, although four times as much of it was necessary to
pass a loan of the same extent of capital, the rate of interest
remained unaltered. The quantity of specie or money in the
market, might increase tenfold, without multiplying the quan-
tity of disposable, or circulating capital. 67
But this rate should not be denominated the legal interest,
because the rate of interest ought no more to be restricted, or
determined by law, than the rate of exchange, or the price of
wine, linen, or any other commodity. And this is the proper
place to expose a very prevalent error.
Wherefore, it is a great abuse of words, to talk of the interest
of money; and probably this erroneous expression has led to
the false inference, that the abundance or scarcity of money
regulates the rate of interest. 68 Law, Montesquieu, nay, even
the judicious Locke, in a work expressly treating of the means
of lowering the interest of money, have all fallen into this
mistake; and it is no wonder that others should have been
misled by their authority. The theory of interest was wrapped
in utter obscurity, until Hume and Smith 69 dispelled the vapour.
Nor will it ever be clearly comprehended, except by such as
shall have acquired a correct notion of what has, throughout
this work, been denominated capital, and shall proceed in the
conviction, that the object lent or borrowed, is not a particu-
lar commodity or object of merchandise, but a portion of value,
— of the aggregate value of the capital available for that ob-
ject; and that the percentage paid for the use of this portion of
capital, at all times and places, depends on the relative sup-
ply and demand of capital to be lent, and is wholly indepen-
dent of the specific form or quality of the commodity, wherein
the loan is made, whether it be money, or any other article
whatever.
Capital, at the moment of lending, commonly assumes the
form of money; whence it has been inferred, that abundance
of money is the same thing as abundance of capital; and, con-
sequently, that abundance of money is what lowers the rate of
interest. Hence the erroneous expressions used by men of
business, when they tell us, that money is scarce, or that money
is plentiful; which, it must be confessed, are equally just and
appropriate, as the very incorrect term, interest of money. The
fact is, that abundance or scarcity of money, or of its substi-
tute, whatever it may be, no more affects the rate of interest,
than abundance or scarcity of cinnamon, of wheat, or of silk.
The article lent is not any commodity in particular, oi even
money, which is itself but a commodity, like all others; but it
is a value accumulated and destined to beneficial investment.
A man, who is about to lend, converts into money the aggre-
gate value he means to devote to that particular purpose; and
the borrower no sooner has it at command, than he exchanges
it for something else; the money that has effected this opera-
tion, forthwith served to effect other similar or dissimilar
operations; the payment of a tax perhaps, or the subsidy of an
army. The value lent has but for a moment assumed the form
of money, in the same manner, as we have traced revenue
received and expended, passing through the same temporary
form; the identical pieces of money serving perhaps a hun-
dred times in the course of a year, to transfer equivalent por-
tions of income. So, likewise, the same sum of money, that
has served to transfer a value from the hands of one lender
into those of a borrower, may, after infinite intervening trans-
fers, perform the like office between a second borrower and
lender, without stripping the former borrower of any part of
the value he has received. In reality, then, it is value which
has been borrowed, and not any particular sort of metal or of
merchandise. All kinds of merchandise may be lent and bor-
rowed, as well as money; nor does the rate of interest at all

Section II. Of the Profits of Capital.
We have now sufficiently considered the nature and motive
of the interest paid by the borrower to the lender of capital,
and, though it appears pretty plainly, that this interest is com-
pounded of the rent of the capital, and of the premium of
insurance against the risk of its partial or total loss, we have
also seen enough, to comprehend the extreme difficulty of
severing and distinguishing these two ingredients.
Let us then proceed, in the next place, to investigate the causes
of the profit derivable from the employment of capital, whether
187Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
and the inconvenience of a long, perhaps a two years’ dura-
tion of one single operation before the returns come to hand,
a proportion of the capital is gradually withdrawn from that
channel; the competition slackens, and the profits advance,
until they rise high enough to attract fresh capital. 72
by a borrower or by the proprietor himself= to which end it
will be necessary, in the outset, to sever it from the profit of
the industry, that turns it to account; and here again we shall
meet with the greatest difficulty, in drawing the line of dis-
tinction; though it is easy to perceive, that these two classes
of profit, generally speaking, are combined in the recompense
or portion of the adventurer. Smith, and most of the English
writers on this science, have omitted to notice this distinc-
tion; they comprise under the general head of the profit of
capital, or stock, as they term it, many items, which evidently
belong to the head of the profit of industry. 70
This will serve also to explain, why the profits, derivable from
a new mode of employment, are larger than those of common
and ordinary employments, where the production and con-
sumption have been well understood for years. In the former
case, competition is deterred by the uncertainty of success; in
the latter, allured by the security of the employment.
Perhaps an approximation may be made to the accurate ap-
preciation of that part of the aggregate profit, which apper-
tains to the capital, and that, which appertains to the industry
employing it, respectively, by comparing the mean ratio of
total profit with the mean ratio of the difference of profit in
the same line of business, which seems a fair index of the
difference of the skill and labour engaged. We will suppose
two houses, in the fur trade for example, to work each upon a
capital of 100,000 dollars, and to make on the average, an
annual profit, the one of 24,000 dollars, the other of 6000
dollars only; a difference of 18,000 dollars fairly referable to
the different degree of skill and labour, the mean of which is
9000 dollars; this may be considered as the gains of industry,
which, deducted from 15,000 dollars, the mean profit of the
trade, will leave 6000 dollars for the profit of the capital
embarked in it.

In short, in this matter, as in all others, where the interests of
mankind clash one with another, the ratio is determined by
the relative demand and supply for each mode of employ-
ment of capital respectively.
It is a maxim with Smith and those of his school, that human
labour was the first price, — the original purchase-money,
paid for all things. They have omitted to add, that for every
object of purchase, there is, moreover, paid, the agency and
co-operation of the capital employed in its production. Is not
capital itself, they will say, composed of accumulated prod-
ucts,-of accumulated labour? Granted= but the value of capi-
tal, like that of land, is distinguishable from the value of its
productive agency; the value of a field is quite different from
that of its annual rent. When a capital of 1000 dollars is lent,
or rather lent on hire, for a year, in consideration of 50 dol-
lars more or less, its agency is transferred for that space of
time, and for that consideration; besides the 50 dollars, the
lender receives hack the whole principal sum of 1000 dol-
lars, which is applicable to the same objects as before. Thus,
although the capital be itself a pre-existent product, the an-
nual profit upon it is an entirely new one, and has no refer-
ence to the industry, wherein the capital originated.
This example I could suggest as a means, rather of distin-
guishing those items of profit thus mixed up together, than of
estimating their respective ratio with any tolerable certainty.
But, without any index to the precise line of demarkation
between the profits of capital and those of the industry em-
ploying it, we may take it for granted, that the former will
always be proportionate to the risk of partial or total loss, and
to the duration of the employment. In practice, adventurers,
having capital at their command, always weigh beforehand
the advantages and disadvantages of the different modes of
investment, as specified above, 71 and naturally prefer, ceteris
paribus, those presenting the smallest risk and the quickest
return; so that there is less competition of capital for hazard-
ous and longwinded adventurers; indeed, none whatever is
embarked in them, unless they hold out a rate of profit so
much above the average rate, as to tempt the capitalist to run
the risk. Theory, therefore, leads to the presumption, which is
confirmed by the test of experience, that the profit of capital
is high, in proportion to the hazard of the adventure, and to
the length of its duration.
Wherefore when a product is ultimately completed by the aid
of capital, one portion of its value must go to recompense the
agency of the capital, as well as another to reward that of the
industry, that have concurred in its production. And the por-
tion so applied is wholly distinct from the value of the capital
itself, which is returned to the full amount, and emerges in a
perfect state from its productive employment. Nor does this
profit upon capital represent any part of the industry engaged
in its original formation.
From all which it is impossible to avoid drawing this conclu-
sion, that the profit of capital, like that of land and the other
natural sources, is the equivalent given for a productive ser-
vice, which though distinct from that of human industry, is
nevertheless its efficient ally in the production of wealth.
When a particular employment of capital, the trade with China,
for instance, does not afford a profit proportionate, not only
to the time of the detention, but likewise to the danger of loss,

The employment of capital, that tends least to the national
advantage, is the carrying trade between one foreign country
and another.

Section III.
Of the Employments of Capital most
beneficial to Society.
When a nation is possessed of an immense accumulation of
capital, it will do well to embark it in all these different chan-
nels of industry; for they are all lucrative, and in nearly equal
degree to the capitalist, though in very different degrees to
the nation at large. What prejudice can arise to the lands of
Holland, which are already in a high state of cultivation and
management, and want neither clearing nor enclosing, or what
injury be sustained by nations possessed of little territory,
like the old states of Venice, Genoa, and Hamburg, from the
large investments of national capital in the carrying trade? It
flowed into that particular channel of employment, merely
because there was no other open to it. But that class of trade,
and generally all external commerce, is ill adapted to a na-
tion deficient in capital, and having not enough to keep its
agriculture and manufacture in activity; and it would be ab-
surd for its government to give premature encouragement to
those external branches of industry; for such a measure would
but check the employment of capital in the manner best cal-
culated to increase the national revenue. China, though it is
the largest empire in the world, and must possess the greatest
aggregate revenue, since it maintains the most numerous and
dense population, abandons to foreigners almost all its exter-
nal commerce. Undoubtedly, in her present condition, she
would be a gainer by extending her external relations of com-
merce; but she affords a very striking example of the pros-
perity attainable without them.

To the capitalist himself, the most advantageous employment
of capital is that, which with equal risk yields the largest profit;
but what is to him most beneficial, may perhaps not be so to
the community at large; for capital has this peculiar faculty,
that, besides being productive of a revenue peculiar to itself,
it is, moreover, a means, whereby land and industry may gen-
erate a revenue likewise. This is an exception to the general
principle, that what is the most productive to the individual,
is so to the community at large. A capital lent to a foreign
country, may very probably produce to the proprietors and
the nation, the highest possible rate of interest; but can afford
no assistance towards extending the revenue of the national
territory, or for the national industry, as it would do, if em-
ployed within the pale of the nation.

The portion of capital embarked in domestic agriculture is
employed best for the interests of a nation; it enhances the
productive power of the land and of the labour of a country.
It augments at once the profits of industry and those of real
property. Capital employed under intelligent direction, may
make barren rocks to bear increase. The Cevennes, the
Pyrenees, and the Pays de Vaud, present on every side the
view of mountains, once a scene of unvaried sterility, now
covered with verdure and enriched by cultivation. Parts of
these rocks have been blasted with gunpowder, and the shiv-
ered fragments employed in the construction of terraces one
above another, supporting a thin stratum of earth carried thither
by human labour. In this manner is the barren surface of the
rock transformed into shelving platforms, richly furnished with
verdure, and teeming with produce and population. The capital
originally expended in these laborious improvements might,
perhaps, have produced larger profits to the capitalist, if em-
ployed in external commerce; but probably the total revenue
of the district would have been inferior in amount.

It is very fortunate, that the natural course of things impels
capital rather into those channels, which are the most benefi-
cial to the community, than into those, which afford the larg-
est ratio of profit. The investments generally preferred are
those that are nearest home; whereof the first and foremost is
the improvement of the soil, which is justly considered the
most safe and permanent; the next, manufacture and internal
commerce; and the last of all, external commerce, the trade
of transport, and the commerce with distant nations. The owner
of a capital, especially of a moderate one, will embark it rather
under his own superintendence, than in distant and remote
concerns. He is apt to think his risk too hazardous, when he
loses sight of his property for any considerable length of time,
when he consigns it to strangers, or can expect only tardy
returns, or is exposed to the chances of litigation with fraudu-
lent debtors, who may take advantage of their unsettled hab-
its of life, or of the laws of foreign countries, with which he is
himself unacquainted Nothing, but the bait of exclusive privi-
lege and monopoly profit. or the violent derangement of in-
ternal industry, can induce an European nation, not possessed
of a large surplus capital, to engage in the colonial or East
India trade. 73

For a similar reason, capital cannot be more beneficially
employed, than in strengthening and aiding the productive
powers of nature. Well contrived and useful machinery pro-
duces more than the interest of its prime cost; and besides
affording additional profit to the proprietor, benefits the con-
sumer and the community at large, to the full extent of the
saving effected by its means; for every thing saved is so much
gain. The productive employments, that rank next in point of
national benefit, are those of manufacture and internal com-
merce; for the profits of the industry they set in motion are
earned at home; whereas, capital embarked in foreign trade
benefits the industry and natural resources of all nations in-
discriminately.

