+++
title= "The Basis of Value and of Supply and Demand"
date= 2015-09-30
image= "/covers/lectures.jpg"
description= "Governments are based on Utility and Authority. The social contract theory is a fallacy invented in Britain"
linkb= "/research/smith/jurisprudence"
linkbtext= "Simple-lectures-on-jurisprudence"
linkf= "/research/smith/jurisprudence/part-1/section-1/chapter-2"
linkftext= "Chapter 2"
heading= "Chapter 1"
icon = "/icons/say.jpg"
+++


## Book 2: The Distribution of Wealth

### Chapter 1 The Basis of Value and of Supply and Demand

The principal phenomena of production have been investigated in the first book; wherein I have shown how human
industry, with the aid of capital and of natural agents and prop-
erties, creates every kind of utility, which is the primary source
of value; and in what way social institutions and public au-
thority operate to the benefit or the prejudice of production.
This second book will be devoted to the consideration of the
distribution of wealth= to which end, it will be necessary, first,
to analyze the nature of value, the object of distribution; sec-
ondly, to ascertain the laws, which regulate the distribution
of value, when once created amongst the various members of
society, so as to constitute individual revenue.
What is it, then, that determines this current price of com-
modities?

The want or desire of any particular object depends upon the
physical and moral constitution of man, the climate he may
live in, the laws, customs, and manners of the particular soci-
ety, in which he may happen to be enrolled. He has wants,
both corporeal and intellectual, social and individual; wants
for himself and for his family. His bear-skin and reindeer are
articles of the first necessity to the Laplander; whilst their
very name is unknown to the lazzarone of Naples, who cares
for nothing in the world if he get but his meal of macaroni. In
Europe, courts of justice are considered indispensable to the
maintenance of social union; whereas the Indian of America,
the Tartar, and the Arab, feel no want of such establishments.
It is not our business here to inquire, wherein these wants.
originate; we must take them as existing data, and reason upon
them accordingly.
The valuation of an object is nothing more or less than the
affirmation, that it is in a certain degree of comparative esti-
mation with some other specified object; and any other ob-
ject possessed of value may serve as the point of comparison.
A house, for instance, may be valued in corn or in money. To
say that it is worth 4000 dollars conveys a more accurate
notion of its value, than to say that it is worth 4000 bushels of
wheat, solely because the habit of reckoning the value of all
commodities in coin makes it easier for the mind to form an
idea of the value of 4000 dollars in other commodities, that is
to say, of the quantity of other commodities obtainable for
that sum, than of that obtainable for 4000 bushels of wheat.
Yet, if wheat be 1 dollar a bushel, the degree of value ex-
pressed by each is the same.

Of these wants, some are satisfied by the gratuitous agency
of natural objects; as of air, water, or solar light. These may
be denominated natural wealth, because they are the sponta-
neous offering of nature; and, as such, mankind is not called
upon to earn them by any sacrifice or exertion whatever; for
which reason, they are never possessed of exchangeable value.
Other wants there are, that can only be satisfied by the em-
ployment of objects possessed of an utility, which they could
not have been invested with without some modification by
human agency, — without having undergone some change of
condition, and without some difficulty having been sur-
mounted for the purpose. Of this kind are the products of
agriculture, commerce, and manufacture, in all their infinite
ramifications. To them alone is any value attached; and for a
very obvious reason; because the very act of production im-
plies an act of mutual exchange, in which the producer has
given his personal agency for the product obtained by its ex-
ertion. Wherefore, he will hardly resign it without receiving
what is, in his estimation, an equivalent. These may be called
social wealth, both because an act of exchange is in itself a
social ati cause exclusive property in the product obtained by
personal exertion, or by an act of exchange, can only be se-
In every act of valuation, the object valued is the fixed da-
tum. In the instance first given, the house is the datum= it is a
definite amount of materials, put together in a definite man-
ner, upon a definite site. But the point of comparison is vari-
able in amount, according to the degree of estimation in the
mind of the valuer. If valued at 4000 dollars, the house is
reckoned to be equivalent to so many pieces of silver coin of
the weight of 416 grains, with a mixture of 179-1664 parts of
alloy; if at 4500 dollars, or 3500 dollars, it is but a variation
of the quantity of the commodity, that is the specific point of
comparison. So likewise, if that point be wheat, the variable
quantity of that commodity would express the degree of value.
Valuation is vague and arbitrary, when there is no assurance
that it will be generally acquiesced in by others. The owner
of the house may reckon it worth 4500 dollars, while an in-
different person would value it at no more than 3500 dollars,
and probably neither would be right. But if another, or a dozen 
pared one with another; 4 that the value of products is not
founded upon that of productive agency, as some authors have
erroneously affirmed; 5 and that since the desire of an object,
and consequently its value, originates in its utility, it is the
ability to create the utility wherein originates that desire, that
gives value to productive agency; which value is proportion-
ate to the importance of its co-operation in the business of
production, and forms, in respect to each product individu-
ally, what is called, the cost of its production.
cured by social institutions. Social wealth, it is to be observed,
As the only part of human wealth, that can form the subject
of scientific research. 1. Because it is the only part that is the
object of human estimation, or at least of such estimation, as
is not altogether arbitrary and mental. 2. Because it is the
only one which is created, distributed, and destroyed, accord-
ing to any rules that can be assigned by human.

The knowledge of the ground-work of the quality, value, or
rather exchangeable value, leads to the perception of its ori-
gin. The items of social wealth are invested with value by the
necessity of giving something to obtain them; and that some-
thing is productive exertion. When once obtained, when this
sacrifice has been male in the attainment, the party is really
more wealthy; he has wherewithal to satisfy more wants; and,
if the object obtained by this sacrifice be unsuited to the per-
sonal wants of the owner, he may make use of it for the at-
tainment of some object of personal desire, by the way of
exchange for some other product; which other product will
itself be the result of similar productive exertion; so that, in
fact, the exchange will be a mere mutual transfer of the pro-
ductive exertion on either side, whereof the two products re-
spectively are the result. When a bushel of wheat is given for
seven pounds of coffee, there is a mere transfer of the pro-
ductive agency exerted in creating the one, for that exerted in
the creation of the other. 3

The utility of a product is not confined to one human being,
but applies to a whole class of society at the least, as in the
case of particular articles of clothing; or to a whole commu-
nity, as in that of most of the articles of food that are adapted
to human consumption in general, without distinction of sex
or age. For this reason, the demand for a specific object, or
product, or act of productive exertion, has a certain degree of
extent. The aggregate demand for sugar in France is said to
exceed 500,000 quintals per annum. Even the individual de-
mand of a specific product for individual consumption may
be more or less urgent. Whatever be its intensity, it may be
called by the general name of demand; and the quantity at-
tainable at a given time, and ready for the satisfaction of those
who are in want of the specific article, may be called the sup-
ply or amount in circulation.

But this must be understood with some limitation; for there is
no object of pleasure or utility, whereof the mere desire may
not be unlimited, since every body is always ready to receive
whatever can contribute to his benefit or gratification. There
must, therefore, be some bounds to demand; and the most
effectual limitation is, the ability to give some other equiva-
lent product for the object of desire. All the porters in a com-
mercial city might desire to have a coach and six for the more
comfortable execution of their business, without raising the
price of horses and carriages a tittle. The objects, which each
individual has to give as an equivalent for the object of his
desire, are no other than the products of his own productive
means, which are limited even in the case of the most wealthy
member of society.
Wherefore, there is a current value or price established for
productive service as well as for products. For, if the agency
exerted in the creation of a bushel of wheat can obtain, as its
reward, in the way of exchange, either a bushel of wheat or
seven pounds of coffee indifferently, what is there to prevent
its obtaining in the same way any other equivalent product,
say a yard of cotton cloth, 5 yards of ribbon, a dozen plates,
or any thing else? Should the bushel of wheat be exchange-
able for a less amount of any of these commodities respec-
tively, the productive agency exerted in the creation of wheat
would be proportionately less rewarded, than that exerted in
the creation of the specific commodity; and a portion of the
former would be attracted to the latter branch of production,
until the recompense of labour in each department should
find its fair level.

Wealth is, in all countries, distributed in every degree of gra-
dation, from the populous level of mediocrity to the solitary
pinnacle of extreme affluence. Accordingly, the products most
generally desirable are really demanded by a limited number
only, because they alone have wherewithal to obtain them;
and even their ability may be more or less according to cir-
cumstances. Whence it may be further concluded, that the
same product or products may be in greater demand at a lower
scale of price, and when attainable by less productive exer-
tion, although nowise increased in utility, merely because
accessible to a greater number of consumers; and, on the con-
Each class of productive agency has a current price peculiar
to itself. If the productive agency exerted in the production
of a bushel of wheat can obtain for itself but 1-15 of its own
product, it will be entitled to no more than 1-15 of the value
of any other product obtainable by exchange for that quantity
of wheat; for instance to 1-15 of a dollar= and so of other
products.

Thus it is obvious, that the current value of productive exer-
tion is founded upon the value of an infinity of products com-
157Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
trary, less in demand at a higher scale of price, because ac-
cessible to a smaller number. are the causes of a general nature, that limit the demand for
each product, and for all products in general.
Suppose that, in a severe winter, a method should be hit upon
of manufacturing knit-waistcoats of woollen at 2 dollars each;
probably all who should have 2 dollars left, after satisfying
more urgent wants, would provide themselves with these
waistcoats; but those who should have but a dollar and a half
left must still go without. If the same article could be pro-
duced at one dollar and a half, these latter also might all be
provided and become consumers; and the consumption would
be still further extended, if they should be produced at one
dollar only. In this manner, products formerly within reach of
the rich alone have been made accessible to almost every
class of society, as in the case of stockings. In respect to supply, it consists of the whole of any commod-
ity which the owners for the time being be disposed to part
with for an equivalent, in other words, to sell at the current
rate, and not merely of what is actually on sale at the time.
The whole of this is also called the circulating or floating
stock. Yet, strictly speaking, no commodity is in circulation,
except during the act of transit from the seller to the pur-
chaser, which is almost instantaneous. But the bare act of tran-
sit has no influence on the terms of the bargain, to which it is
commonly subsequent; it is a mere matter of executive detail.
The point of real importance is, the inclination of the owner
to part with the object of property. A commodity is in circu-
lation, whenever it is in quest of a purchaser, which it may be
in the most urgent need of, without altering its locality in the
least. Thus, the stock in a shop or warehouse is in circulation;
thus too, lands, rent-charges, houses, and the like, are said to
be in circulation, and the expression is intelligible enough.
Even industry is some. times in circulation and sometimes
not, according as it is either in quest of employment, or al-
ready employed.

When a product is raised in price, whether by taxation or
otherwise howsoever, the contrary effect is experienced; the
number of its consumers is reduced; for it can only be ob-
tained by such as can afford to pay for it; and the ability to
purchase is not increased by the same causes, that operate to
raise the price. Thus, in England, the great majority of the
population is wholly precluded from the consumption of vi-
nous liquors, and of many other articles; for their attainment
involves so large a sacrifice of products, or of productive
agency, that those only can attempt it, who have a great deal
of either to spare. In such cases, not only is the number of
consumers diminished, but the consumption of each consumer
is reduced also. Though a consumer of coffee may not be
compelled, by a rise of its price, to relinquish that beverage
altogether, he must at all events curtail the amount of his con-
sumption; which is then like that of two individuals, of whom
one discontinues, and the other remains able and willing to
continue the use of the article.
For the same reason, an object ceases to be in circulation, tile
moment it is set apart, either for consumption or for export to
an. other market, or accidentally destroyed, or withdrawn by
the caprice of its owner, or held back at a price, which amounts
to a refusal to sell.

Inasmuch as supply consists of those commodities only, which
are to be had at the current price or ordinary rate of the mar-
ket, a commodity raised by the cost of production above that
level, will cease to be produced, or to form part of the supply.
Wherefore, the supply will be more abundant, when the cur-
rent price is high, and more scanty when that price has de-
clined.

In commercial speculation, as the purchaser does not buy for
his own consumption, he proportions his purchases to what
he expects to sell. Since, then, the quantity he can sell de-
pends upon the price he can afford to sell at, he will buy less
according as the price rises, and more according as it falls.
Besides these universal and permanent limitations of supply
ana demand, there are others of a casual and transient nature,
which always operate concurrently with the former.
In poor countries, objects of even the commonest use, and of
inferior price, frequently exceed the means of a great propor-
tion of the population. There are countries, where shoes,
though cheap, are out of reach of most of the inhabitants. The
price of this commodity does not fall to a level with the means
of the people; because that level is still below the bare cost of
production. But, shoes of leather not being absolutely neces-
sary to existence, those who are unable to procure these, wear
wooden shoes, (sabots) or go barefoot. When this is unhap-
pily the case with an article of primary necessity, part of the
population must perish, or at least cease to be renewed. These
The prospect of an abundant vintage will lower the price of
all the wine on hand, even before a single pipe of the ex-
pected vintage has been brought to market; for the supply is
brisker, and the sale duller, in consequence of the anticipa-
tion. The dealers are anxious to dispose of their stock in hand,
in fear of the competition of the new vintage; while the con-
sumers, on the other hand, retard their fresh purchases, in the
expectation of gaining in price by the delay. A large arrival
and immediate sale of foreign articles all at once, lowers their
price, by the relative excess of supply above demand. On the
contrary, the expectation of a bad vintage, or the loss of many consumption; that is to say, a diminution of the prosperity of
the community, which consists in production and consump-
tion. Even the produce already existing is not so properly
consumed as it should be. For, in the first place, the propri-
etor withholds it as much as possible from the market. In the
next, it passes into the hands, not of those who want it most,
but of those who have most avidity, cunning, and dishonesty;
and often with the most flagrant disregard of natural equity
and humanity. A scarcity of corn occurs; the price rises in
consequence; yet still it is possible, that the labourer, by re-
doubling his exertions, or by an increase of wages, may earn
wherewithal to buy it at the market price. In the mean time,
the magistrate fixes corn at half its natural price= what is the
consequence? Another consumer, who had already provided
himself, and consequently would have bought no more corn
had it remained at its natural price, gets the start of the labourer,
and now, from mere superfluous precaution, and to take ad-
vantage of the forced cheapness, adds to his own store that
portion, which should have gone to the labourer. The one has
a double provision, the other none at all. The sale is no longer
regulated by the wants and means, but by the superior activ-
ity of the purchasers. It is, therefore, not surprising, that a
maximum of price on commodities should aggravate their
scarcity.
cargoes on the voyage, will raise prices above the cost of
production.

Moreover, there are some particular products, which nature
or human institutions have subjected to monopoly, and thus
prevented from being supplied in equal abundance with those
of a similar description. Of this kind are the wines of particu-
lar and celebrated vineyards, the soil of which cannot be ex-
tended by the extended demand. So the postage of letters is,
in most countries, charged at a monopoly-price.

Finally, whatever be the general or particular causes, that
operate to determine the relative intensity of supply and de-
mand, it is that intensity, which is the ground-work of price
on every act of exchange; for price, it will be remembered, is
merely the current value estimated in money. The demand
for all objects of pleasure, or utility, would be unlimited, did
not the difficulty of attainment, or price, limit and circum-
scribe the supply. On the other hand, the supply would be
infinite, were it not restricted by the same circumstance, the
price, or difficulty of attainment= for there can be no doubt,
that whatever is producible would then be produced in un-
limited quantity, so long as it could find purchasers at any
price at all. Demand and supply are the opposite extremes of
the beam, whence depend the scales of dearness and cheap-
ness; the price is the point of equilibrium, where the momen-
tum of the one ceases, and that of the other begins.
A law, that simply fixes the price of commodities at the rate
they would naturally obtain, is merely nugatory, or serves only
to alarm producers and consumers, and consequently to de-
range the natural proportion between the production and the
demand; which proportion, if left to itself, is invariably es-
tablished in the manner most favourable to both.
This is the meaning of the assertion, that, at a given time and
place, the price of a commodity rises in proportion to the
increase of the demand and the decrease of the supply, and
vice versa; or in other words, that the rise of price is in direct
ratio to the demand, and inverse ratio to the supply.
Hope, fear, malevolence, benevolence, in short, every human
passion or virtue may influence the scale of price. But it is
the province of moral science to estimate the intensity of their
effect upon actual price in every instance, which is the only
thing we are here to attend to. Neither need we advert to the
operation of the causes of a nature purely political, that may
operate to raise the price of a product above the degree of its
real utility. For these are of the same class with actual rob-
bery and spoliation, which come under the department of
criminal jurisprudence, although they may intrude themselves
into the business of the distribution of wealth. 

The functions
of national government, which is a class of industry, whose
result or product is consumed by the governed as fast as it is
produced, may be too dearly paid for, when they get into the
hands of usurpation and tyranny, and the people be compelled
to contribute a larger sum than is necessary for the mainte-
nance of good government. This is a parallel case to that of a
producer without competitors, whether he have got rid of them
by force, or by accidental circumstances. He may raise his
product to what price he will, even to the extreme limit of the
consumer’s ability, if his monopoly be seconded by author-
The utility of an object, or, what is the same thing, the desire
to obtain it, may possibly be unable to raise its price to a level
with its cost of production. In this case it is not produced,
because its production would cost more than the product
would be worth. Probably the price that caviar 6 would fetch
at Paris would hardly equal the charge of producing it there;
for it is so little in request there, that it scarcely would bring
the lowest price that it could be procured for, and consequently
it is not produced; but elsewhere, it is both produced and
consumed in great quantities.

When the price of any object is legally fixed below the charges
of its production, the production of it is discontinued, be-
cause nobody is willing. to labour for a loss= those, who be-
fore earned their livelihood by this branch of production, must
die of hunger, if they find no other employment; and those,
who could have purchased the product at its natural price, are
obliged to go without it. The establishment of the fixed rate,
or maximum, is a suppression of a portion of production and
159Jean-Baptise Say, A Treatise on Political Economy
industry, and in that distinguished by the general name of
capital, is far more sacred and indisputable, than in the re-
maining class of natural powers and agents. The industrious
faculties of man, his intelligence, muscular strength, and dex-
terity, are peculiar to himself and inherent in his nature. And
capital, or accumulated produce, is the mere result of human
frugality and forbearance to exercise the faculty of consum-
ing, which, if fully exerted, would have destroyed products
as fast as they were created, and these never could have been
the existing property of any one; wherefore, no one else, but
he who has practised this self-denial, can claim the result of it
with any show of justice. Frugality is next of kin to the actual
creation of products, which confers the most unquestionable
of all titles to the property in them.
ity. But it is the province of the political philosopher, and not
of the political economist, to teach us how this evil may be
avoided. In like manner, although it be the province of ethics,
or of the knowledge of the moral qualities of man, to teach
the means of ensuring the good conduct of mankind, in their
mutual relations, yet, whenever the intervention of a super-
human power appears necessary to effect this purpose, those
who assume to be the interpreters of that power must be paid
for their service. If their labour be useful, its utility is an im-
material product, which has a real value; but, if mankind be
nowise improved by it, their labour not being productive of
utility, that portion of the revenues of society, devoted to their
maintenance, is a total loss; a sacrifice with out any return.
With the most earnest wish to confine myself within my sub-
ject it is impossible to avoid sometimes touching upon the
confines oi policy and morality, were it only for the purpose
of marking out their points of contact.
These several sources of production are some of them alien-
able, as land, implements of arts, &c.; and some inalienable,
as personal faculties. Some also are consumable, as are all
the items of floating capital; others, inconsumable, as land.
Some, too, there are, that are neither alienable nor consum-
able, yet are capable of destruction, as the human faculties,
intellectual and corporeal, which vanish with human exist-
ence.

