+++
title= "The Profit of Landed Property"
date= 2015-09-30
image= "/covers/economy.jpg"
description= ""
linkb= "/research/say/treatise"
linkbtext= "Index"
linkf= "/research/say/treatise"
linkftext= "Index"
heading= "Chapter 9, Section 1"
icon= "/icons/say.jpg"
+++


<!-- health, and inclination to work, is sure of shelter, clothing, and subsistence, at the least. -->


What is the profit of land independent of that accruing from the industry and capital, devoted to its cultivation; and to consider the profit of land in the abstract, and whence it originates, without any inquiry as to who may be
the cultivator, whether the proprietor himself, or a tenant under him.

Land has the faculty of transforming and adapting to the use of mankind an infinity of substances, which, without its inter-
vention, would be to them of no service; it yields nutriment and vegetative juices to the grain, the fruits, and vegetables,
whereon we subsist; as well as to the forests, whereof we construct our houses, ships, and furniture, and whence we
derive fuel to keep us warm. Its agency in the production of all these commodities may be called, the productive service
of land. And thence it is, that the profit of the proprietor originates.

Many writers think 76 that the value of products is never more than the recompense of the human
agency or surplus, that can be set apart as the peculiar profit of land, and constitute the rent paid for its use to the proprietor. The tenor of their argument is this= the proprietor of land lying waste or fallow having also a capital to dispose of, may, at his pleasure, expend it, either in cultivation, or in some other way. 

If he reckons that the cultivation of his land will yield him as large a return as any other investment, he
will give it the preference; and, indeed, it is found by experience, that this mode of investment is preferred, even though
somewhat less advantageous than others, as being at all events more safe. Well= and what do they infer from this? Why, that
cultivation yields no return whatever, beyond the interest of the capital engaged in it; 77 and if so, what is there left for the profit on the productive powers of the soil? 

Evidently nothing whatever. I have endeavoured to put the argument in the
clearest and most intelligible light; and I have to observe upon
it, that it proceeds upon a partial and imperfect view of the
matter, and upon a total neglect of the influence of demand in
the fixation of value. I will now endeavour to give a more
complete view of the subject.
He derives a further benefit from the useful substances to be
extracted from its entrails; the stone, metal, coal, peat, &c.
&c.
Land, as we have above remarked, is not the only natural
agent possessing productive properties; but it is the only one,
or almost the only one, which man has been able to appropri-
ate, and turn to his own peculiar and exclusive benefit. The
water of rivers and of the ocean has the power of giving mo-
tion to machinery, affords a means of navigation, and supply
of fish; it is, therefore, undoubtedly possessed of productive
power. The wind turns our mill; even the heat of the sun co-
operates with human industry; but happily no man has yet
been able to say, the wind and the sun’s rays are mine, and I
will be paid for their productive services. I would not be un-
derstood to insinuate, that land should be no more the object
of property, than the rays of the sun, or blast of the wind.
There is an essential difference between these sources of pro-
duction; the power of the latter is inexhaustible; the benefit
derived from them by one man does not hinder another from
deriving equal advantage. The sea and the wind can at the
same time convey my neighbour’s vessel and my own. With
land it is otherwise. Capital and industry will be expended
upon it in vain, if all are equally privileged to make use of it;
and no one will be fool enough to make the outlay, unless
assured of reaping the benefit. Nay, paradoxical as it may
seem at first sight, it is, nevertheless, perfectly true, that a
man, who is himself no share-holder of land, is equally inter-
ested in its appropriation with the share-holder himself. The
savage tribes of New Zealand, and of the north-western coast
of America, where the land is unappropriated, have the greatest
difficulty in procuring a precarious subsistence upon fish and
game, and are often reduced to devour worms, caterpillars,
and the, most nauseous vermin= 75 not unfrequently even to
wage war on one another, from absolute want, and to devour
their prisoners as food; whereas, in Europe, where the appro-
priation is complete, the meanest individual, with bodily
The productive power of the soil has no value, unless where
its products are objects of demand. Travellers, who have ex-
plored the interior of America, and other desert parts of the
globe, make repeated mention of tracts of the richest land,
capable of every kind of culture, yet wholly destitute of any
useful or valuable products. But no sooner is a colony estab-
lished in the vicinity, or, by some means or other, a market
found where the products of the soil will, in the way of ex-
change, pay the usual rate of interest upon the requisite ad-
vances, than cultivation begins immediately. Up to this point,
there is no difference between us. But if any circumstance
operate to aggravate the demand beyond this point, the value
of agricultural products will exceed, and sometimes very greatly exceed, the ordinary rate of interest upon capital; and this excess it is, which constitutes the profit of land, and enables the actual cultivator, when not himself the proprietor,
to pay a rent to the proprietor, after having first retained the full interest upon his own advances, and the full recompense
of his own industry.
faction and pleasure attached to territorial possession, the
consideration, weight, and dignity it communicates, and the
titles and privileges with which it is in some countries ac-
companied, contribute greatly to increase this natural prefer-
ence.
Land is an agent gratuitously furnished to mankind at large,
by whom it is afterwards exclusively appropriated; but its
appropriation does not begin to be profitable to the individual,
in whose favour it is made, until its products are an object of
demand, and until their supply ceases to be co-extensive with
the desire for them, as it is with respect to some other natural
objects, air, water, &c.
It is true, that land is more exposed than other property to the
burden of public taxation, and to the arbitrary exactions of
power, precisely because it can neither be removed nor con-
cealed. A floating capital may take any shape whatever, and
be removed at will It can escape tyranny and civil commo-
tions more readily, than even the person of its proprietor. It is
a safer object of property; for it is often impossible to attach
it, or to make it specifically responsible for the debts of the
proprietor. Moreover, it is much less exposed to litigation
than landed property. Yet, it is clear, that all these advantages
are more than counterpoised by the superior risk of invest-
ment; and, that landed property is still preferred to floating
capital; since land is dearer, in proportion to its annual re-
turns.
From those products of the soil only, thus raised in value by
the demand, can there accrue that profit to the proprietor which
has been called the profit of land; and which is paid in all
civilized countries, and especially where manufacture and
commerce multiply the objects of exchange. It may some-
times happen, that in a particular district of such a country,
the rent of land, may be very trifling; as in our own district of
Sologne, where it is no more than 20 cents an acre; but this is
owing to the want of roads, and particularly of water-car-
riage, which makes the charge of bringing its agricultural pro-
duce to market, added to the charge of cultivation, absorb
nearly The whole value it will there sell for. In some coun-
tries, highly civilized and productive in the extreme, land pays
no more than 3 or 4 per cent upon its price or purchase-money.
Yet, this is no proof of the poverty of the soil; it proves only,
that it sells dear. A landed estate may yield 24 dollars the
acre, and require very little expense of cultivation; as if it be
laid down in pasture, for instance; in such case it must owe
most of its value to its natural properties; yet, if it have cost
the proprietor 800 dollars the acre, it will yield a return of 3
per cent only. And herein consists the difference between the
profit and the rent of land= profit is high or low, according to
the quantum of the product; rent, acctording to the quantum
of the pur chase-money or price. An acre of land, yielding a
profit of one dollar only, will bring as high a rent as an acre
yielding a profit of 50 dollars, if 50 times as much has been
paid for the one as for the other.
Whatever may be the exchangeable price of land and capital
one to the other, it is proper to observe, that their interchange
makes no variation in the supply of productive agency of land
and capital respectively in circulation, and disposable for the
purpose of production; consequently, that exchangeable price
can nowise affect the real and positive profit of land and of
capital. When Richard sells his estate to Thomas, the produc-
tive service of the land is at the disposal of Thomas instead of
Richard; and that of the capital, given in exchange for it, is at
the disposal of Richard instead of Thomas.
The only thing, which really varies the amount of productive
agency of land in circulation, is the actual amelioration of the
soil, by clearing and bringing new land into cultivation, or
enlarging the productive power of old land, and thus increas-
ing its product. Savings and accumulations of capital are, in
the shape of agricultural improvements, transformed into
landed property, and made to participate in all the peculiar
advantages and disadvantages attached to it. The same may
be said of houses, and generally of all capital invested in a
fixed and permanent object; it thenceforth loses the character
of capital, and assumes that of landed property.
Whenever land is bought with capital, or capital with land,
occasion is given for a comparison of the returns of the one
species of property with the returns of the other. It is pos-
sible, that an estate, bought with a capital of 100,000 dollars,
may produce but 3 or 4000 dollars per annum, whilst the same
amount of capital would yield 5 or 6000 dollars. The lower
rate of interest, which the proprietor is content to take on a
purchase of land, may be attributed, in the first place, to the
superior stability of the investment. Capital can seldom be
made productive, without undergoing several changes both
of form and of place, the risk of which is always more or less
alarming to persons unaccustomed to the operations of in-
dustry; whereas, on the contrary, landed property produces
without any change of either quality or position. The satis-
Whence we may draw this invariable maxim; that the pro-
ductive agency of land is possessed of value, which value,
like value in general, increases in the direct ratio of the de-
mand, and the inverse ratio of the supply; and that, since land
differs as much in quality, as in site and position, there is a
peculiar demand and supply for each peculiar quality. A de-
mand for so much wine, more or less, whatever it arise from,
creates a specific demand for as much productive agency of
the soil, as may be requisite for its growth; 78 and the extent of

Section II.
Of Rent.

surface, adapted to the culture of the grape, determines the
supply of that productive service. If the soil, capable of grow-
ing good wine, be very limited in extent, and the demand for
such wine very brisk, the profit of the soil itself will be ex-
travagantly high.
When a farmer takes a lease of land, he pays to the proprietor
the profit accruing from its productive agency, and reserves
to himself, besides the wages of his own industry the profit
upon the capital he embarks in the concern; which capital
consists in implements of husbandry, carts, cattle, &c. He is
an adventurer in the business of agricultural industry; and,
amongst the means he has to work with there is one that does
not belong to him, and for which he pays rent i.e., the land.
It is worthy of remark, that all land, that yields any profit at
all, however trifling the amount, even so little as 20 cents the
acre, or even less, may be kept in a state of cultivation= and
there have been many instances of its cultivation under such
circumstances. Herein it differs from capital and industry. A
labourer, if he finds himself settled in a place, where his labour
does not yield him what he has reason to expect, can migrate
to another. So, likewise, capital quickly flows from a chan-
nel, that affords a less, to one that affords a greater return.
But land has not the same facilities= it is of necessity immove-
able; consequently, out of its gross product, after the deduc-
tion in the first instance of all advances of capital, with inter-
est, as well as of the profits of industry, without which there
could be no product whatever, there still remains to be de-
ducted the expense of carrying the product to the market, or
place of exchange. When these several deductions absorb the
whole product of the land, the land itself yields no profit at
all, and the proprietor can never succeed in getting a rent
from it. Even if he cultivate it himself, he can only gain a
profit on his capital and industry, but will receive none what-
ever from the bare ownership of the land. In Scotland, there
are tracts of unproductive land thus cultivated by the propri-
etors, which it would not answer for any one else to under-
take. So, likewise, in the back settlements of the United States,
there are tracts of great extent and fertility, whose revenue
alone would not maintain the proprietors; yet they are, never-
theless, cultivated with success= but it is by the proprietors
themselves, who consume the product at the place of growth,
and are obliged to superadd to the profit of the land, which is
little or nothing, the further profit of capital and personal in-
dustry, which afford a handsome competency.
The preceding section was occupied in explaining the source
of the profit of land. Its rent is generally fixed at the highest
rate of that profit, and for the following reason.
Agricultural adventure requires, on the average, a smaller
capital, 80 in proportion, than other classes of industry, reck-
oning the land itself as no part of the capital of the adven-
turer. Wherefore, there is a greater number of persons able,
from their pecuniary circumstances, to embark in agricultural,
than in any other speculations; consequently, a greater com-
petition of bidders for land upon lease. On the other hand, the
quantity of land fit for cultivation is limited in all countries;
whereas the quantity of capital and the number of cultivators
have no assignable limitation. Landed proprietors, therefore,
at least in those countries which have been long peopled and
cultivated, are enabled to enforce a kind of monopoly against
the farmers. The demand for their commodity, land, may go
on continually increasing; but the quantity of it can never be
extended.

This circumstance is equally applicable to the nation at large,
and to each particular province or district. The number of
acres to be rented in each province is incapable of extension;
whilst the number of persons in a condition to rent them has
no fixed and absolute limit.

Whenever this is the case, the bargain between the land-holder
and the tenant must always be greatly in favour of the former;
and, whenever there is any portion of the soil, which yields to
the latter more than the interest of his capital and the wages
of his industry, a higher bidder will soon offer himself. The
liberality of a few proprietors, the distance at which they hap-
pen to reside, the ignorance of others, and even of the farm-
ers themselves, and the imprudence of a few more, may some-
times operate to depress the ratio of rent below the maximum
of profit; but these are accidental circumstances, which act
for a season only, and can never prevent the regular and con-
stant action of natural causes, which must in the end prevail.
It is obvious, that land, though in a state of cultivation, vields
no profit, when no farmer will pay rent for it, which is a con-
vincing proof that it gives no surplus, after allowing for the
profit of the capital and industry requisite for its cultivation.
In the instance just mentioned, the effect is occasioned by the
distance of the market; the expense of transport swallows up
the profit, which might otherwise be made of the land. Other
instances might be adduced, in which badness of seasons,
war, or taxation, have produced the same effect, and partially
or totally absorbed the profit of land, and thus thrown it out
of cultivation. 79

Besides this advantage accruing to the land-holder, derived
from the very nature of things, he has likewise in general the
advantage of possessing, or being able to accumulate greater wealth, and sometimes credit, patronage and influence, into
the bargain= but the first advantage is alone sufficient to in-
sure him the sole benefit of any circumstances, that may hap-
pen to enhance the profit of land. The opening of a canal or
road, the increase of population, wealth, and affluence in the
province, always operate to raise his rent. He also benefits by
every improvement in the cultivation; for a man can afford to
pay dearer for the hire of an instrument, when he knows how
to turn it to better account.
ants so confident of undisturbed possession, as to build upon
ground held on lease. Such tenants improve the land, as if it
were their own; and their landlords are punctually paid; which
is less frequently the case elsewhere.
The land is sometimes cultivated by persons possessed of no
capital whatever= the proprietor furnishes himself the requi-
site capital, as well as the land. They are called in France,
metayers, and commonly pay to the landlord half the gross
product. This arrangement is to be met with only in the in-
fancy of agriculture, and is of all others the least conducive
to improvement; for the party who bears the expense of ame-
lioration, whether landlord or tenant, makes the other a gra-
tuitous present of half the interest on his advances. This kind
of tendency was more common in the feudal times, than it is
at present. The lords were above tilling the land themselves,
and their vassals had not the means. The largest incomes were
then derived from the land, because the lords were large pro-
prietors; but they bore no proportion to the extent of the land.
Nor was this owing to the defect of agricultural skill, so much
as to the scarcity of capital devoted to improvements. The
lord felt little anxiety to improve his property, and expended,
in a way more liberal than productive, an income that he might
easily have tripled. He levied war, gave feasts and tourna-
ments, and maintained a numerous retinue. If we look at the
then degraded condition of commerce and manufacture,
superadded to the insecurity of the agricultural interest, we
need go no further for the explanation of the reason, why the
bulk of the community was in the extreme of indigence; and
why, independently of every political cause, the nation itself
was weak and impotent. Five departments would now be able
to repel attacks, which overwhelmed all France at that pe-
riod= but happily for her, the other states of Europe were no-
wise in a better condition. 

When the proprietor himself expends a capital in the improvement of his land, in draining, irrigation, fences, buildings,
houses, or other erections, the rent then includes, in addition
to the profit of the land, the interest likewise of the capital so expended. 81

The farmer may sometimes undertake these expenses of ame-
lioration himself; but he can only calculate on receiving in-
terest on the outlay during the continuance of his lease= at the
expiration of which, the benefit must devolve to the land-
holder, being wholly incapable of removal= thenceforward
the landlord derives the whole profit, without having made
any of the advances= for he receives a proportionate increase
of rent in consequence. The farmer should, therefore, engage
only in those improvements, whose effects will last no longer
than his lease; unless the lease be long enough, to allow the
profit arising from his improvements to repay the whole out-
lay, together with the interest. It is in this way, that long leases
operate to increase the product of the land; and it is evident
the effect will be the greatest, when the land is farmed by the
proprietor himself; for he is far less likely, than the farmer, to
lose the benefit of such advances; every judicious improve-
ment yields him a permanent profit, and the original outlay is
amply Tepaid, when the land is finally disposed of. The
farmer’s certainty of reaping the advantage till the end of his
lease, is equally conducive to the improvement of landed prop-
erty with the length of leases. On the contrary, such laws and
customs, as authorize the cancelling of leases in specified
cases, as in case of sale by the proprietor, are highly prejudi-
cial to agriculture; since the farmer will hardly venture to
undertake any considerable improvement, if kept in continual
fear of seeing an intrusive successor appropriate the recom-
pense of his ingenuity, labour, and capital. In fact, every im-
provement he should make would but increase the risk of that
injustice; for land is far more saleable in good condition than
otherwise.

