---
title: "Maxims 13-30"
# date: 1767
weight: 4
author: François Quesnay
image: "/covers/maxims.png"
icon: "/flags/fr.png"
description: "Let each one be free to cultivate in his own field those products that his interest, his faculties, and the nature of the earth suggest to him will produce the largest possible result"
---


## 13. Freedom of Cultivation

Let each one be free to cultivate in his own field those products that his interest, his faculties, and the nature of the earth suggest to him will produce the largest possible result. 

One ought not to favor monopoly in the cultivation of land, for it is prejudicial to the general revenue of the nation. 

The precedent that favors the abundance of products of the greatest need, in preference to other productions, disregarding the purchasable value of the one or the other, is inspired by that short-sightedness that sees not the effects of exterior reciprocal commerce that supplies to all; and which fixes the price of the products that each nation can cultivate with the greatest profit. 

Next to the riches of land cultivation, it is the revenue and taxes that are the riches most needed in a state to defend subjects against scarcity of food and want, against enemies, and to sustain the glory and strength of the monarch and the prosperity of the nation.

## 14. Multiplication of Cattle

Let the raising and multiplication of cattle be favored; for it is they that furnish to the earth the manure that produces the richest harvests.

## 15. Cultivation Extensive Enough

Let the land employed in the culture of grain be reunited as far as possible to form large farms to be cultivated by rich laborers ; for there is less of expense and much more of net products in the larger enterprises of agriculture than in the smaller. 

The multiplicity of small farmers is prejudicial to the population. A more secure population, more freedom for the different occupations, and different labors that divide men into different classes, it is this that is maintained by the net product. All thrift and economy profits the work that can be done by means of animals, machinery, rivers, etc., returns to the advantage of the people and the state, for the greater the net product, the more of gain is there to the people of whatever service or occupation.

## 16. No Obstacle to the Exportation of Goods

External commerce of the products of the land should not be arrested nor prevented in any way, for it is the demand, the market, that regulates the production each year.

## 17. Freedom and Ease in Transportation

Let the means of the transportation of the productions of manual labor be facilitated by repairing roadways, and by the navigation of canals, of rivers, and of the sea ; for the more that is saved in the act of carrying on commerce, so much more is added to the revenue of the territory.


## 18. Good Prices for Agricultural Products and Merchandise

Let the price of agricultural products and merchandise, in a country, be not lowered ; for then reciprocal commerce with foreign countries would become disadvantageous to the nation. As is the purchasable value of things, so is the revenue. Abundance and no value is not wealth. Dearth and high prices is misery. Abundance and high prices is opulence.


## 19. Low Prices Are Harmful to the People

Low prices are not profitable to the laboring class; for cheapness of products lowers the wages of the laboring people, diminishes their comfort, procures less lucrative work and occupation for them, and destroys the revenue of the nation.


## 20. Comfort for the Lowest Classes of Citizens

Let the comfort of the lowest classes of citizens be not diminished; for they must aid in the consumption of products, if reproduction and the revenue of the nation are not to be lessened.


## 21. Avoid Unfruitful Economy

Let the landlords and those who exercise the lucrative professions not give themselves up to unfruitful economy, for this would cut off from circulation and distribution a portion of their revenue or of their gains.


## 22. Little or None of the Luxury of Decoration

Let the luxury of decoration not be entertained to the detriment of land culture, or any of the investments and outlays made necessary for subsistence, for the stability of these preserves good prices, the demand for the lands, products, and the production of the nation's revenue.


## 23. Reciprocity in Commerce

Let the nation not suffer from loss through reciprocal commerce with other countries even if this commerce were profitable to the merchants, who would gain, regardless of the welfare of fellow-citizens, in the sale of commodities thus brought about The accumulations of the fortunes of these merchants would create a curtailment in the circulation of revenue prejudicial to distribution and reproduction.

## 24. Balance of Money in Trade is Illusory

Let no one be deceived by an apparent advantage in reciprocal commerce with foreign countries, which is simply a balance received in money, without examining and comparing the profits that result from the merchandise one has sold and the merchandise which has been bought. For often the loss is to that nation which receives a surplus in money. And that loss reacts to the prejudice of the distribution and reproduction of the revenues.


## 25. Complete Liberty in Commerce

Let there be complete liberty in commerce; for the surest, most exact, and most profitable policy for interior and exterior commerce of the state and nation consists in the greatest possible freedom in competition.


## 26. Attention to the Revenue Rather Than to Population

Let there be less attention given to the augmentation of the population than to the accumulation of revenue, for greater freedom or ease in procuring large revenues is preferable to the greater pressing wants of subsistence, created by a population, and which exceed the revenue ; and the resources are greater for the needs of a state when a people are in comfort, and there are also more means to make agriculture prosperous.


## 27. No Economization of the Necessary Public Expenditures.

Let the government occupy itself with those operations necessary for the prosperity of the kingdom rather than with attention toward expenditures; for with greater riches the larger expenses will cease to appear so excessive. But one should not confound a perversion of funds with simple expenses, for such a perversion can dissipate all the riches of a nation and of the sovereign.


## 28. No Pecuniary Fortunes in the Administration of Taxes

Let the administration of the finances be in the tax collection, not in the expenses of the government, nor occasion pecuniary fortunes that take away a portion of the revenue from circulation, distribution and reproduction.


## 29. Credit of Financiers, Harmful Resource

Let no one hope for resources, to meet the extraordinary needs of a state, but in the prosperity of the nation, and not in the credit of financiers; for pecuniary fortunes are clandestine riches that know not king nor country.


## 30. Borrowing Always Injurious

The state should avoid loans formed from the funds of financiers. 

This is because they:
- burden a state with devouring debts
- occasion a commerce of the finances through the agency of negotiable paper
- increase more and more the unfruitful pecuniary fortunes through the rebate or discount

These fortunes:
- separate money from agriculture
- deprive the country of the necessary riches for the improvement of real estate and the exploitation of agriculture.
